The Project Gutenberg eBook of Business Administration: Theory, Practice and Application. [Vol. 1] Business Economics
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Business Administration: Theory, Practice and Application. [Vol. 1] Business Economics

Contributor: Oscar P. Austin
        Ernest L. Bogart

Editor: Samuel MacClintock
        Walter D. Moody

Release date: November 21, 2017 [eBook #56018]
                Most recently updated: June 14, 2020

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION: THEORY, PRACTICE AND APPLICATION. [VOL. 1] BUSINESS ECONOMICS ***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Carol Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 56018-h.htm or 56018-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/56018/pg56018-images.html)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/56018/56018-h.zip)


Transcriber’s note:

      Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores,
      _like this_.

      Subscripted numbers in chemical formulas, page 347, are
      presented within curly braces, preceded by an underscore,
      for example: C_{6}H_{3}OHOCH_{3}CHO.

      Page numbers are displayed in the right margin.





BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION


      *      *      *      *      *      *

  BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
  TEXT BOOKS

  Business Economics.
  Business Organization and Management.
  Advertising and Salesmanship.
  Trade and Commerce.
  Transportation.
  Money, Banking and Insurance.
  Investments and Speculation.
  Accounting.
  Auditing and Cost Accounting.
  Business Law and Legal Forms.

      *      *      *      *      *      *


BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

Theory, Practice and Application

Editor-In-Chief

WALTER D. MOODY

General Manager, The Chicago Association of Commerce,
Author, “Men Who Sell Things.”

Managing Editor

SAMUEL MACCLINTOCK, PH. D.

Editorial and Educational Director,
La Salle Extension University

This work is especially designed to meet the practical every-day
needs of the active business man, and contains the fundamental and
basic principles upon which a successful business is founded,
conducted and maintained. To those looking forward to a business
career, this work forms the basis for a practical and systematic
course in “Business Administration”






Published by
La Salle Extension University
Chicago

Copyright, 1910,
Lasalle Extension University.




BUSINESS ECONOMICS


¶ This treatise has been especially prepared by E. L. Bogart, Ph. D.,
Associate Professor of Economics, University of Illinois, and Author
of Economic History of the United States; Hon. O. P. Austin, Chief of
Bureau of Statistics, Department of Commerce and Labor; and John
Bascom, D. D., LL. D., former President University of Wisconsin. It is
supplemented by the writings of recognized experts in the production,
preservation and distribution of wealth. The treatment is modern,
popular and authoritative. The volume contains many timely and
practical suggestions which can be applied with profit to any
business. It is also arranged to serve as a quick reference work, and
includes a complete table of contents, a comprehensive index and test
questions.

  WALTER D. MOODY,
  Editor-in-Chief.




INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION.

BY WALTER D. MOODY.

General Manager, The Chicago Association of Commerce.

Author of “Men Who Sell Things.”

“_The recipe for perpetual ignorance is: Be satisfied with your own
opinion and content with your knowledge._”


[Sidenote: Business a contest of wits]

This is an era of the greatest commercial activity the world has ever
known. The development of business is one of the marvels of the new
century. A few years ago science, as a factor in commerce, was little
known and less appreciated. The amazing advantages to business of
intellectual attainments were utterly without recognition. Today,
however, business has become a contest in which the quickest
perception wins, thus transforming the counting room into a battle
ground upon which brain matches brain for supremacy and success.

[Sidenote: Success-educated enthusiasm]

Ah, that enchanting word, S-U-C-C-E-S-S. It does not require a magic
key to unlock the door to business efficiency. There is nothing
mystic, nothing mysterious in the applied method of the really
resourceful men in this day of great successes, of marvelous
achievements in business enterprise. The sum total is contained in two
words, words that electrify, nevertheless. EDUCATED ENTHUSIASM.

[Sidenote: Changing conditions make opportunities]

The most formidable barrier to progress has always been the senseless
opposition of those to whom it would be of the greatest benefit.
Changing conditions are the order of the day, for enlightenment has
worked wonders. In olden times, a man of affairs was obliged to guard
his property and his loved ones by building a moat around his house
and posting sentinels in and around his estate. The time is not long
past when, because of prejudice, perversity or ignorance, many men
believed that opportunity knocked only once at any man’s door. Today,
thanks to deeper insight, most men believe that life itself is
opportunity; that the very air we breathe is opportunity; that each
new day presents broader opportunities for accomplishing more because
of better directed energy. This is not alone the accepted dogma of the
man who is making his way in the world. It is the creed, doctrine,
tenet or religion, whichever you may care to term it, of the great
captains of industry everywhere.

[Sidenote: New ideas count]

The more successful the man, the more does he think, study, plan, as a
part of his daily occupation in the development of the affairs in
which he is interested. Newer and better ways to get things done is
the business standard employed today by successful men in all lines.
Only yesterday if a man of genius advanced a new idea, he found
himself ridiculed and his innovation opposed on all sides because it
was a new idea. Today, it is different. The man of ideas counts in the
trend of affairs as he has never counted before.

[Sidenote: Must keep step with changing times]

Everything has a subjective reason. Progress is acting as a mighty
dynamic force in changing men’s viewpoint of life and things. Suppose
the stroke oar on a varsity crew, while in a race against an opposing
crew from a competitive institution, should suddenly stop rowing in
harmony with his associates and begin to row backwards-that crew
would not get very far without trouble. Suppose a lawn mower should be
reversed and forced to run backwards--there would not be much progress
made in cutting grass on that lawn. Varsity crews and lawn mowers must
move forward. Business men must advance with the times.

A great merchant in Chicago tells a good story of his youth. He was a
member of a state regiment of militia. On a certain occasion, his
company was sent out on dress parade. An old maiden aunt, with
considerable colonial blood in her veins, took much pride in her
nephew and his company. While reviewing the parade, she was suddenly
heard to exclaim: “Why, every single man in that company is out of
step excepting my nephew.” Most men who fail to get on in the world do
not realize that success lies in keeping step--in making progress with
changing conditions. They generally make the mistake of thinking that
the world and everything in it is out of harmony with themselves.

[Sidenote: New ideas worth searching for]

A business man of successful experience realizes that ideas--newer and
better principles of conducting business--are of the greatest value,
and he also knows that it pays him to search for them. The same old
way of doing things cannot longer be successfully employed month after
month and year after year as under the old regime. The business man
must be modern, up-to-date. The physician or lawyer finds that to
compete successfully he is compelled to search without ceasing in
order that he may comprehend the advancement in treatments or
procedures. “To the man who fails belong the excuses.”

[Sidenote: Demand for trained men]

President James, of the University of Illinois, was asked if there was
any demand from business houses for college-bred men. His reply was:
“The demand has been far in excess of the supply since courses in
business administration were established in our institution seven
years ago. Each year has brought many more requests than we have men
to recommend.” Ten years ago President James would have been ridiculed
for advancing this new idea for the establishment of a school of
commerce in connection with a university. Today, commercial schools
are a part of the regularly established courses of nearly all of the
great universities of our country. Men trained in the theory, practice
and administration of business will always occupy the best positions
and will always command the greatest salaries.

[Sidenote: Value of new ideas in business emergencies]

All men fail at times in the accomplishment of satisfactory results in
the various enterprises in which they are engaged, without being able
to give an explanation. The principles that have been applied
successfully for many years seem apparently to have counted for
nothing. It is frequently evident that in such cases a very
insignificant thing, a mere oversight perchance, has been the direct
cause of the failure. To be able to put the finger on the precise
cause of the lack of success in one’s method would locate the cause of
the disaster. Then it is that a real appreciation of new ideas is
fully realized.

[Sidenote: Men paid for what they know--not for what they do]

Failure is more often chargeable to a refusal to learn by mistakes how
to avoid them than it is in making them. Experience is a good teacher,
but who can deny the value to be gained in learning from the
experience of others, for we cannot all have the same experience or
the same view of similar experiences. There are many pathways to
success, but the road of individual experience is narrow and rugged.
It is a commonly accepted fact that for every ten dollars a
high-salaried man draws, he receives nine dollars for what he knows
and one dollar for what he does. On the same basis the successful
business man, employing a large force of other men, realizes that his
own greatest worth, as applied to his affairs, lies not so much in
what he can do himself as how much he can encourage his employes to
do. In either case, his own personal knowledge is the power behind the
throne.

[Sidenote: Knowledge in excess of present needs necessary]

The man who would secure the largest net return from his individual
effort in the field of endeavor, and he who would realize the greatest
possible advantage from the efforts of those under his command must,
of necessity, possess knowledge--indispensable perception far in
excess of the needs of the moment. Discernment, like a bank account,
soon runs out if it is overdrawn or if it is not continually
replenished. In business the “checking system” of knowledge is the
sort of account that pays best--not the “savings account system.”
Knowledge that is simply corked up and allowed to accumulate cobwebs
and rust can avail nothing. The sharpest vinegar is procured by
constantly replenishing the old stock with new.

[Sidenote: 90% failures vs. 10% moneymakers]

Reliable statistics prove that only about ten per cent of all people
who engage in business are successful and make money; the other ninety
per cent become insolvent and fail. That is, they do not actually
encounter the sheriff, or go into the hands of a receiver, but they
fail nevertheless to succeed in the sense of making money, and what
other possible reason can anyone have for engaging in business if not
to accumulate money?

[Sidenote: Failures due to lack of intellectual capacity]

Why do so many fail? Ask any credit man and he will tell you that it
is not because of the lack of capital, or other material resources,
but it is due primarily to a lack of intellectual capacity, the sort
of brains that dig and work and sweat until they find a way to
accomplish things; brains that go to the bottom of things; brains that
are always looking for better results; brains that never abandon a
problem until they have found a way to solve it. A friend once told me
that he inquired of the manager of a house employing some three
hundred traveling men how many salesmen they had. The manager replied,
“Three.” My friend asked, “How’s that? I am told your force of
traveling men numbers nearly three hundred.” “Ah, that is quite
different,” replied the manager; “we have two hundred and ninety-seven
traveling men, but only three salesmen.” Quite likely that manager’s
estimate was intended to be taken figuratively rather than literally,
but it serves to illustrate the fact that in this great United States
there are millions of men, young, middle-aged and old, who are content
to plod along in a mediocre sort of way, heedless or unmindful of the
fact that opportunity, knowledge, possibilities, are calling, calling,
calling to them to come up higher. There are hundreds of thousands of
other men engaged in business who sit idly by while their trade, like
the sands in the hour glass, slowly ebbs away, and eventually is
absorbed by their more progressive business neighbors.

[Sidenote: Moneymaking and business literature]

There is still another vast army of business men--salesmen, clerks and
wage-earners of all classes--who are beginning to catch a glimpse of
the dawning of a new business era, the greatest the world has ever
known, an era impregnated with possibilities and opportunities for
those who are ready with wicks trimmed and oil in their lamps. To the
earnest latter class which is really desirous of profiting by the
experience of others, there is no need of elaborating the
possibilities embodied in this course of reading in Business
Administration. This set of books, containing valuable business data
on many subjects, thousands of pages telling the story of success
illustrated by trained men whose names are respected everywhere, is
intended to reach all classes. There is absolutely nothing in print
that can even approach or can begin to compare with it in value as a
reference library for business men or excel it as a complete course of
instruction for any man desirous of making the best of his
possibilities and opportunities in the kaleidoscopic age through which
the business world is now moving.

[Sidenote: Practical ideas best]

The more practical the ideas, the better the basis for good work. Not
long since, business men generally pooh-poohed the idea of employing
in the conduct of their business anything new, which was taken from
the writings and experience of others, such as is contained in this
remarkable series, contributed to by some of the brightest minds in
the business world today. There is, however, in these days
unmistakably a hungering and thirsting for just this new sort of
literature. It fills a long-felt need--fills it exactly, completely,
satisfactorily. Being the author of a work on salesmanship which has
had a countrywide circulation, I have been literally besieged by
business men everywhere asking me to recommend books treating of
successful business methods, and have been chagrined to find how
limited was the supply. The man who formerly was prejudiced against
such sources of information must now step aside and make way for
progress or unite with the popular demand for more education and
better methods.

[Sidenote: Cannot afford vs. can afford]

Show me the man who says he has no patience for such things, and I
will show you a man, like the stroke oar and the lawn mower, who does
not believe in moving forward in progress. Show me the man who says he
has no time to read of new methods and principles, and I will show you
the one who utterly fails to perceive that familiarity with business
literature of this kind means pecuniary advancement. Show me the man
who says he cannot afford to invest in such a set of books, and I will
show you one who apparently CAN afford to waste his energy in
misdirected effort--that energy and effort which are to every
wage-earner and tradesman both his stock in trade and his invested
capital.

[Sidenote: Failures unnecessary]

Someone has said, “There are three kinds of people in the world--the
Can’ts, the Won’ts and the Wills. The first fail at everything; the
second oppose everything; the third succeed at everything.” I would
add a fourth kind--the largest class of all--the Don’t Trys, the
“Oh-what’s-the-use,” “It-doesn’t-interest-me” sort of people. Their
name is legion; their fault is lack of confidence. Knowledge is the
greatest inspiration of confidence to be found on earth. You may not
personally be held in the hope-paralyzing bondage that produces the
“Oh-what’s-the-use,” or “I’m-not-interested” germ, but if you are not,
you are exceptional. Most people are, and that is the reason that such
persons are just about what luck, good fortune or chance make them,
succeeding if fortune favors them, failing if they are left to depend
upon their own resources. Result: Nine fail where one succeeds.

It is very fortunate, indeed, for most men that so much of their
happiness depends upon success. There is nothing on earth quite so
terrible to think of as failure, especially that due to lack of
effort, unless possibly it be the failure of a man who lacks the
courage or initiative to try to make the most of himself, and thus
lets his best opportunities escape him. And this last is really the
most pitiful thing that can befall a man. It is well enough to plan
opportunities, but if we had the wisdom to take advantage of such
opportunities as naturally come to us, results would more often be
found in the balance on the right side of the ledger. And so I am of
the opinion that a clear explanation of why a very large class of
people do not succeed is found in some of these expressions--“I don’t
care,” “I can’t,” “It doesn’t interest me,” or “Oh, what’s the use.”

[Sidenote: Basis of all business success]

One of the great objects set forth in this Business Administration
series is to supply the positive energy which begets courage,
confidence, initiative and success. We want to make you feel the
necessity of doing some reading, a little plain thinking, and to make
as clear as possible the important things that are involved in the
serious but very fine game of business.

With business becoming with each succeeding day more and more of a
science, it is high time to understand what is essential to it.
Speaking of the subject of “Organized Business,” a great authority
recently said, “It is time even for business men to understand
business.” Again, the purpose of this course in Business
Administration is, if possible, to measure the power and principles of
business, to trace their ramifications, define their elements, get
hold of their vital fundamentals, and so comprehend them, both in
technical detail and as a mighty unit. And I am confident we have done
all this. I find that at the foundation, the machinery of business is
simple, but whether it is plain or complicated, all who would succeed
must make every effort to comprehend it thoroughly. All I care to
emphasize at present is the great truth that knowledge, established
and classified, is the basis of all business success. This is clearly
established in this course of reading, and I am trying to incite your
imagination in writing of its merits just as I would endeavor to
enable you to realize it if I could talk to you personally right
across my desk. The observant man can see clearly the things I am
talking about, but to most men the mind’s eye perceives not by
observation, but only when the imagination is stimulated. So I would
stir all men to look earnestly into these things, with a view to their
personal betterment.

[Sidenote: Business axioms simple to understand]

Business is far more than business as it is commonly understood. It is
a science, and it is the eager, practical minds of business men that
we shall endeavor to convince first of that fact, and our reasons for
addressing those principally concerned are especially good. Why? I
have found that in writing about business whenever I was able to make
the principles so plain that business men understood them, everybody
else did, so it is to be expected that if business axioms can be made
simple enough for business men to understand them, everyone will
apprehend them. Everybody. And it is everybody that we are attempting
to reach.

[Sidenote: Knowledge is power]

For nearly thirty centuries men have recognized the concrete wisdom of
Solomon’s proverb: “A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge
increaseth in strength.” Yet we have been slow in making its
application universal to the race. But we are beginning to understand
that the power inherent in knowledge applies as well to commercial and
industrial as to scholastic, political and social life, as well to the
counting room as to the pulpit, as well to the shop as to the
university, as well to the farm as to the bar. Knowledge is power and
is the only source of real intellectual sovereignty that the Creator
has ever entrusted to men.

In conclusion, I would say that these words are addressed to the
business men of America, and this designation includes the banker and
his clerks, the farmer and his sons, the lawyer and the law student,
the financier and the man who sells bonds and stocks, the merchant and
his clerk, the accountant and the bookkeeper, the manager and his
assistants--the ambitious young men of the Twentieth Century type,
contemplating the pursuit of any business, trade or occupation.




  CONTENTS


  BUSINESS ECONOMICS.


  Practical Economics.

  By ERNEST LUDLOW BOGART                                          1

      I. THE MODERN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM--                            1
         The English Manor--Institution of Private Property--
         Competition Defined--Development of Industrial
         Liberty--Domestic System of Industry--Factory System
         of Industry--The State as a Regulator of Industrial
         Undertakings.

     II. THE AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES OF THE UNITED STATES--         9
         The Land Policy of the United States--Irrigation--
         Dry-Farming--Farm Ownership--Decline of the
         Agricultural Population--Character of Agriculture in
         the United States--Forest Resources--Fisheries.

    III. THE MINERAL RESOURCES OF THE UNITED STATES--             19
         The Problem Connected with our Mineral Resources--Steps
         Taken to Remedy the Evil--Coal--Petroleum--Iron--Precious
         Metals--Copper--Water Power and Its Use.

     IV. CAPITALISTIC PRODUCTION--                                29
         The Rapid Industrial Development and Its Causes--Factory
         Defined--Division of Labor--Use of Labor-Saving
         Machinery--Specialization and Localization of
         Industry--Large-Scale Production--System of
         Standardization.

      V. TRUSTS AND MONOPOLIES--                                  39
         Phases of Combination for Fixing Prices--Classes of
         Industrial Establishments--The Trust
         Movement--Causes and Effects of Industrial
         Combinations--Evils of Combination--Legislative
         Regulation.

     VI. SPECULATION AND CRISES--                                 51
         Risks of Modern Business--Function of the Speculator--
         Legitimate and Illegitimate Speculation--The
         Occasion of a Crisis--“Hard Times”--Theories as to
         the Causes of Crises.

    VII. THE MODERN WAGE SYSTEM--                                 60
         Beneficial Results of the Factory System--Abuses of
         the Factory System--The Existence of a Wage-Earning
         Class--The Wage System--Historical Systems of
         Labor--Modifications of Individualism--The Bargain
         Between the Employer and the Laborer--Necessity of
         Protective Legislation.

   VIII. LABOR ORGANIZATIONS AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING--          68
         Growth of Labor Organizations in the United
         States--Knights of Labor--American Federation of
         Labor--Objects and Methods of Labor Organizations--
         Restrictions Limiting the Output of Labor--Collective
         Bargaining--Boards of Conciliation and Arbitration.

     IX. WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT WORK--                             80
         Evils of Early Factory System--Expansion of Woman
         Labor--Why Women are Paid Lower Wages than Men--
         Desirability of Employment of Women--Child Labor--
         Labor Legislation.

      X. UNEMPLOYMENT AND INSURANCE--                             90
         Number of Unemployed in Modern Industry--Classification
         of the Unemployed--Causes of Unemployment--Insurance
         against Accident, Sickness and Old Age in the United
         States; in Germany.

     XI. MACHINERY AND INDUSTRIAL EFFICIENCY--                   101
         Evils of Machinery--Labor’s Complaint against
         Machinery--Industrial Education in Germany; in
         England; in the United States--Aids to Industrial
         Development in the United States.

    XII. PROFIT-SHARING AND CO-OPERATION--                       110
         Methods of Profit-Sharing--Economic Theory of
         Profit-Sharing--Objections against Profit-Sharing
         --Experiments in Profit-Sharing--Co-Operation--The
         Rochdale Society--Producers’ Co-Operation--Advantages
         and Defects of Co-Operation.

   XIII. PROBLEMS OF DISTRIBUTION--                              119
         Functional Distribution--Personal Distribution--Forms
         of Distribution Proposed--Questions Connected with
         Functional Distribution; with Personal Distribution.

    XIV. SAVING AND SPENDING--                                   127
         Expenditures for Different Purposes--Relation Between
         Saving and Spending--Desirability of Work for its Own
         Sake--Problem of Luxury--Economy in Consumption--
         Economic Evils of Intemperance.

     XV. MONEY AND BANKING--                                     137
         What Determines the Value of Money--Bimetallism--
         Monometallism--Government Paper Money--Kinds of Money
         in the United States--Problems of the Banking System
         of the United States.

    XVI. TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION--                      145
         Consolidation in the Railroad World--Question of
         Railroad Rates--The Public Nature of Railroads--
         Ownership of Railroads--Electric Interurban
         Railways--Express Companies--The Telephone--The
         Telegraph--Inland and Ocean Water Transportation--Our
         Canal System--Our Merchant Marine.

   XVII. TAXATION AND TARIFF--                                   154
         Consequences of Taxation--Adam Smith’s Rules of
         Taxation--Problems of Taxation--Sources of Revenue in
         the United States--The General Property
         Tax--Inheritance Taxes--The Question of the Tariff.

  XVIII. THE FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT--                           163
         Functions of a Modern State--Anarchism--Individualism--
         Modified Individualism--Culture State Theory--State
         Socialism--Socialism--Municipalization of Local
         Public Utilities.

    XIX. ECONOMIC PROGRESS--                                     172
         Improvement in Rate of Wages and Hours or Labor--
         Advances in the Field of Production--Reasons Why
         Labor has not Profited More by the Great Increase in
         Wealth--Reduction in the Cost of Semi-Luxuries--Lines
         Along Which Reform is Needed.


  Manufacturing.
         By O. P. AUSTIN                                         179

  INTRODUCTION--                                                 179
         The Hand Method of Manufacturing--The Factory Method--
         Chief Producers by each Method--Exchanges of the
         World--Relation of Development of Manufactures to
         Commerce.

      I. MODERN MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS OF THE WORLD--             185
         Their Development During the Last Two Centuries--The
         Waterfall as a Source of Power--Development of Steam
         Power--Enlargement of the Use of Machinery Following
         the Application of Power--The Factory Town--Results
         of the Application of Steam Power to
         Transportation--Electricity as an Aid in
         Manufacturing.

     II. THE USE OF MACHINERY IN MANUFACTURING--                 193
         The Spinning Wheel--The Loom--Kay’s Flying Shuttle--
         Hargreave’s Spinning Jenny--Arkwright’s Water
         Frame--Crompton’s Spinning Mule--Machinery in the
         Iron and Steel Industry--Growth in Manufacturing
         Following the Application of Machinery to the Leading
         Industries--Effect of Machinery upon the Employment
         of Men--Effect upon Employment of Capital--Effect
         upon Prices of Labor, of Raw Materials, of Finished
         Products--Effect upon Commerce--Effect upon the
         Quality of Manufactures Produced.

    III. DEVELOPMENT OF THE FACTORY SYSTEM--                     203
         Growth of the Factory System in England--Causes of the
         Recent Growth of the Manufacturing Industries in the
         United States--Estimates of the Value of Manufactures
         in the Principal Countries of the World--Net and
         Gross Valuations of Manufactures in the United States.

     IV. CAPITAL IN MANUFACTURING--                              214
         Capital a Growing Factor in Manufacturing Industries--
         Manufacturing in Great Establishments and under
         Expert Management a Favorite Investment for
         Capital--Effect of Increase in Gold Production--
         Investments of Capital and Use of Machinery Increase
         more Rapidly than Employment of Labor--United States
         Statistics of Investment and Production Superior to
         those of Other Countries.

      V. TRUSTS AND COMBINATIONS--                               222
         Reasons for Co-Operation--The Pooling System--The
         Company--The Corporation--Trusts and Other
         Combinations--Causes of the Transformation from the
         Company and the Corporation to the Trust--Effect of
         Trusts upon Production, Prices, Wages and Employment.

     VI. THE IRON AND STEEL INDUSTRY--                           230
         Pig Iron the Basis of all Iron and Steel Manufacturing--
         Pig Iron Production of the World in 1800 Compared
         with 1907--Fall in Prices of Iron and Steel a Result
         of the Application of Modern Methods of Manufacture--
         History of Iron Manufacture; Development in England
         and Germany--History of Iron-Making in the United
         States--Transformation from the Charcoal Method to
         that of Coal and Coke--The Earlier Methods of
         Manufacturing Steel Contrasted with those of Today--
         Rival Claims of the English and the American
         Inventors, Bessemer and Kelly, to the Modern System
         of Steel Manufacturing--Description of the Process of
         Manufacturing Steel under American Methods--The Use
         of Powerful Machinery and Lessening Proportion of
         Work Performed by Man Power--The Railway and
         Steamship in Relation to the Steel Industry--Great
         Combinations of Iron and Steel Manufacturers--Description
         of the Process of Transforming Iron into Steel by the
         Bessemer Process.

    VII. THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY--                                  247
         Growth of the Textile Industry from the Hand Industries
         to Use of Machinery and the Factory System--Great
         Britain, the Greatest Cotton Manufacturing Country of
         the World in Proportion to Population--The United
         States the World’s Greatest Producer of Raw
         Cotton--Contrast of Manufacturing Methods in the
         United States and Europe--Great Britain the World’s
         Principal Cotton Manufacturer for Exportation--The
         United States a Large Manufacturer but Chiefly for
         her Own People--Light Grades of Cotton Manufactured
         in Europe--History of the Textile Industry--Description
         of the Manufacture of Textiles--Cotton Manufacturing
         has Outgrown that of Other Textiles--History of its
         Manufacture in India, in Asia Minor, in America, and,
         in Recent Years, in Japan--Other Oriental Countries
         Manufacture by the Hand Processes--Growth of the Use
         of Machinery in Cotton Manufacturing, from the
         Spinning Wheel and Spinning Jenny to Modern Machine
         Methods--The Textile Industry of the United States.

   VIII. THE MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES OF THE UNITED STATES--     263
         The United States the World’s Greatest Manufacturer--
         Its System Developed More Recently than that of
         Europe--Has Utilized Modern Methods in Combination
         with Large Sums of Capital--The United States the
         Only Nation Taking a Census of Manufactures--The
         Gross and Net Value of Manufactures as Reported by
         the Census--Relation of the Gross and Net Figures to
         Those of Other Countries--Acceptance of the Lowest
         Estimate of Manufactures in the United States Places
         her Products Far in Excess of Those of any Other
         Nation--Growth of Manufacturing has Outgrown
         Consuming Power of the People and Resulted in Rapid
         Growth in Exportation--Manufactures Form a Growing
         Share of Exports--Principal Manufactured Articles
         Exported and Principal Countries to which Sent.

     IX. STATISTICS OF MANUFACTURING--                           289
         Production of Manufacturers’ Materials--Development
         of Transportation Facilities--Distribution of
         Manufactures--World’s Production of Gold, 1492 to
         1908--Enlargement of Capital Invested in
         Manufacturing--The Various Classes of Manufactures
         Produced in the United States--The Value of Each
         Group at Recurring Censuses from 1880 to
         1905--Distribution of the Manufacturing Industries in
         the Various Sections of the United States--Share
         which Manufactures Form in the Imports and Exports of
         the United States--Share which Manufactures Form in
         the Imports and Exports of the Principal Countries of
         Europe--Estimated Value of Manufactures Produced in
         the Principal Countries of the World, 1780 to
         1905--Commerce of the World, 1780 to 1905--Number of
         Persons Engaged in the Principal Manufacturing
         Industries of the United States--Cotton Spindles of
         the World--Cotton Production of the World--Growth of
         Population, Commerce, Transportation Facilities, and
         in Production of Certain Articles Required in
         Manufacturing, 1800 to 1908.

  Concrete and Steel.
         By J. F. SPRINGER                                       322

  Chemistry and the Industries.
         By BENJAMIN BALL FREUD                                  341

  The Close Relation of the Producer-Gas Power Plant to the
           Conservation of our Fuel Resources.
         By ROBERT HEYWOOD FERNALD                               352

  Efficiency in Shop Operations.
         By H. F. STIMPSON                                       370

  The Bridge Between Labor and Capital.
         By JOHN MITCHELL                                        380

  The Unemployed.
         By JOHN BASCOM                                          384

  Quiz Questions                                                 403




PRACTICAL ECONOMICS.                                                       1

BY ERNEST LUDLOW BOGART, Ph. D.

[Born Yonkers, N. Y., 1870; A. B., A. M., Princeton University, 1890,
1896; Ph. D., University of Halle, 1897; Graduate Student, University
of Halle, 1894, 1896-7, University of Berlin, 1894-5, Princeton
University (Fellow), 1895-6, Columbia University, 1897-8. Assistant
Professor Economics and Social Science, Indiana University, 1898-1900;
Professor Economics and Sociology, Oberlin College, 1900-1905;
Assistant Professor Economics, History and Politics, Princeton
University, 1905-9; Associate Professor Economics, University of
Illinois, 1909. Author of Economic History of the United States
(Longmans Green & Co., 3rd edition, 1909), and several monographs and
periodical articles.]




INTRODUCTION.


In the preparation of this text the author has endeavored to apply the
principles of economic science to some of the more important problems
of the modern industrial world, and especially those now confronting
the people of the United States. He has attempted in doing this above
all to make the text practical. The student or teacher of economics
will recognize at once that the sections are arranged into groups
corresponding with the traditional divisions of economic text-books
into production and distribution (land, capital and organization, and
labor), consumption, exchange, and the relation of the government to
the individual. It is hoped that the text may not be without profit
and interest to the general reader as well as the students of the La
Salle Extension University.




I. THE MODERN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM.


We shall probably get the clearest idea of the complexity of our
modern industrial society if we contrast it briefly with the simpler
state of social organization which preceded it. For this purpose we
may take the English manor of the eleventh century. At that time
England was a purely agricultural country, and the whole country           2
was divided into manors, of which the lord was regarded as the owner,
under feudal conditions, while those who cultivated the land were his
tenants. These tenants--villeins and cotters--worked on the lord’s
land two or three days in the week, and the rest of the time
cultivated their own holdings. The whole of the land of the manor,
both that of the lord and that of the tenants, was cultivated on an
elaborate system of joint labor. The land was divided into strips of
about half an acre each, and a man’s holding might consist of a dozen
or more of these strips scattered about in different parts of the
manor. This was done in order to secure equality in the fertility and
location of each man’s land. At that time the prevailing method of
agriculture was known as the three-field system, in which one field,
comprising about one-third of the manor and containing a portion of
the scattered strips of the lord and every tenant, was planted with
wheat, a second field comprising another third of the cultivated land
was planted with barley or oats, while the third field was left
fallow. The second year saw the second stage of this three-year
rotation, one-third of the manor lying fallow each year to recuperate
from this exhausting method of cropping; artificial manures were
unknown.

Now the significant characteristics of such a manorial society were
three. First, it was economically self-sufficient, that is,
practically everything that was needed or was consumed on the manor
was produced there. There was no need of intercourse with the outside
world and there was little contact with it. Salt, iron, and millstones
were almost the only things that the inhabitants of such a manor had
to buy from outsiders. Consequently there was no production of goods
for a market, little money, and almost no trade. The few things that
were purchased were paid for at prices fixed by custom. Secondly,
agriculture was carried on under a system of joint labor, and
under customary methods which did not change from generation to            3
generation. It is clear that as long as all the land of the manor was
thrown together, for purposes of cultivation, into fields on which
were planted wheat or barley or which lay fallow, no one individual
could cultivate his land differently from his neighbors. Indeed, the
holdings of the different tenants were not even separated by fences,
but only by ridges of grass. On the land which lay fallow the cattle
were turned out to graze; if any man had attempted to plant a new crop
the third year, his neighbors’ cattle would have devoured it under
such a system. Production was regulated absolutely by custom, and no
opportunity was given for the development of the inventiveness or
initiative of the progressive individual. Thirdly, the tenants were
personally unfree, that is, they did not have the liberty of moving
freely from place to place, but were bound to the soil which they
cultivated. A man could not freely choose either his occupation or his
residence. There was no mobility or freedom of movement. Labor was
wholly or partly compulsory, and on terms rigidly fixed by custom or
by superior authority.

Such a society differs from that of today in almost every point, and
offers a startling proof of how far we have progressed in the past
eight or nine hundred years. For many of these characteristics,
however, we do not need to go back to the English mediaeval manor; the
plantation of the South two generations ago, with its system of slave
labor, furnishes an illustration more familiar to most of us. With
such a condition of industrial development we may now profitably
contrast our own of the twentieth century. The chief characteristics
of the modern industrial system are the institutions of private
property, of competition, and of personal liberty.

The institution of private property is so familiar to us and so
fundamental in modern economic life, that we commonly regard it as
a natural right. Nevertheless, private property, like most other           4
economic institutions, is the result of a long evolution. Primitive
man can hardly have had the conception of private property, and when
it did begin to emerge, it was at first confined to movables. Indeed
we may say that on the mediaeval English manor the private ownership
of land did not yet exist in the modern sense. It was found however
that, when each cultivator was permitted to fence in his holding and
to call it his own, he cultivated it much more carefully and produced
much more. Inclosure led to private property in land and to individual
freedom in its use. Today in the United States the possession and
transfer of landed property is almost as easy as that of movables.
Private property must be justified on the ground of social utility,
because under this method of control so much more is produced than
under any system of commercial ownership yet tried. But there are not
wanting objectors who contend that limits should be placed upon this
institution, and that the right of use, of bequest, and possibly of
unlimited acquisition should be brought under social control. The
beneficence of private property turns largely upon the existence of
competition and individual liberty and to these we must now turn.

Competition is defined as “the act of seeking or endeavoring to gain
what another is endeavoring to gain at the same time.” But competition
in modern industrial life is not merely a struggle to appropriate an
existing good. The very contest, as over the control of a market, may
and probably will lead to cheaper and larger production, and thus to
the benefit of society. Competition is a selective process in our
modern economic society, and through it we have the survival of the
fittest. “Competition,” so runs the proverb, “is the soul of trade.”
There is, to be sure, a dark side to the picture, for economic
competition involves the defeat of the weaker party, but this does not
necessarily mean his destruction, for his very failure may sharpen         5
his faculties and secure his ultimate success, or at worst he may find
employment under his successful rival. But here again it is being
urged that competition is brutal and that we should go back to the
mediaeval method of regulation by custom, or resort to combination and
monopoly. We are now witnessing experiments in both directions, but
competition still remains the controlling force of modern economic
society, and bids fair to continue so. It should however be the
function of society to raise the ethical level of competition.

Industrial liberty has been developed even more slowly and painfully
than the institution of private property, and has in some instances
not yet been wholly won. Slavery and serfdom have given way before the
higher and more beneficent conception of freedom or liberty. We
believe today that a man generally knows what is best for him and will
utilize his opportunities to the best advantage; that by giving him a
maximum of freedom the welfare of society will at the same time be
best promoted. Consequently, in our modern industrial society, a man
is given not only social and religious liberty, but is free to move,
to choose his occupation, to produce and to trade, to associate with
his fellows, and to expend his income as he will. But here again,
while the prevailing rule is liberty, society has found it necessary
to lay restrictions upon the abuse of this liberty. It is not enough
even to regard the industrial world as a great game in which each may
act as he pleases provided only he observes the rules of the game. A
higher conception of responsibility and duty must accompany freedom of
action if we are to secure the best results.

The term “industrial society” has already been frequently used and
needs a somewhat fuller explanation. About the year 1760 there took
place in England what is usually called the Industrial Revolution. A
number of inventions were made which rendered it possible to use           6
steam-driven machinery in the manufacture, first of textile and then
of other goods. Manufactures were removed from the home, where they
had hitherto been carried on, to the factory. Capital began to be used
in large masses, machinery displaced hand tools, and the laborer
ceased to own the implements with which he worked. Men, machines, and
capital were massed in the factory and organized under the management
of a new set of industrial organizers for the purpose of producing
goods for a world market. The development of such an industrial
society has been attended by the minute division of labor, by a
growing separation of classes, by concentration of the population in
urban centers, by the increasing cost and complexity of machinery, by
the development of improved methods of transportation and of credit,
by the combination of labor and of capital, by the enormous increase
of production, and by the growing concentration of wealth.

The introduction of power manufacture completely revolutionized
industry. The independent workman with his own tools was superseded by
the factory, the small producer has given way in turn to the trust.
With the introduction of expensive machinery it became necessary to
organize capital on a large scale. Corporations with limited liability
were organized for the manufacture of goods, the exploitation of
mines, the building of railroads, and the carrying on of trade. As
methods of production improved industry became more and more
concentrated, and finally huge trusts took over the operation of
combined plants. The business unit has grown increasingly larger, and
the need and power of capital have become increasingly important.
Capital has played a role of growing significance and has become more
and more powerful in modern economic life. Indeed the name
“capitalistic production” has been applied to modern industry because
of the predominant importance of capital in all lines of wealth            7
production. Impersonal, growing by sheer force of its own momentum,
capital is often thought of as intensely selfish and even cruel.
Abuses which have arisen in the development of modern capitalistic
industry must be remedied, but attacks upon capital itself are
misguided and rest upon a mistaken analysis of methods of production.

Before the introduction of the factory system, under the so-called
“domestic” system of industry, the laborer carried on his work in his
own home, where he provided the raw material, owned his own tools,
furnished the motive power--his muscles--and was his own master. Today
every one of these conditions is changed--the work is carried on in
the factory, the raw material, the tools, the motive power are all
provided by the capitalist, the laborer contributing only his own more
or less skilled labor, while the conditions under which he carries on
his work are largely determined for him. He is no longer his own
master. To protect himself against the growing power of capital the
worker has organized with his fellows into trade unions. These seek to
meet the monopolistic power of capital by exerting a monopolistic
control over labor. While they realize that modern productive
processes cannot be carried on without capital, they also insist that
labor is equally essential. They claim that capital has received more
than its fair share of their joint production and has exploited labor;
consequently they insist that labor must now demand its just reward
and enforce the claim by strikes and by raising wages. To enforce
their monopoly, the policy of the closed shop is often enforced. The
interests of capital and labor have thus often been made to appear
antagonistic instead of complementary to one another. Frequently in
their struggles the interests of the consumer have been entirely lost
sight of.

These conflicts in the productive processes of modern economic society
have led many people to look to the state as the regulator of industry     8
and to invoke state aid or state interference along many lines.
Maladjustments in the labor contract, mistaken production, leading
perhaps to speculation and financial panics, abuses of power by
corporate interests, discriminations by railroads, and similar
irregularities are made the excuse for an appeal to state authority.
Some would even go so far as to have the state take over and manage
all productive enterprises; but socialism is as yet a protest rather
than a constructive force. In the last analysis the state is the
regulator of all industrial undertakings, for they all concern
society. The state must hold the balance even and see that fair play
is given to all groups and all classes; but the greatest amount of
freedom compatible with economic justice must be sought for. It is a
difficult question how far the state must interfere in the conduct or
management of industrial enterprises in order to secure social
justice. There is a decided tendency at present to a strengthening of
the regulative power of the state for the protection of the weaker
classes of society. And yet on the whole the institution of private
property, free competition, and a maximum of individual liberty remain
the fundamental conditions of our economic life.

But while under the system of individualism, industrial activities
have been multiplied, wealth has been enormously increased, and human
progress has been greatly advanced, many abuses and evils still
remain. Many practical economic problems still await solution. Some of
these have already been suggested in the preceding paragraphs; others
remain to be presented. It is the purpose of this text to apply to
some of the more important practical current problems of our modern
industrial life the principles of economic science, and to endeavor to
reach fair and just conclusions on controverted points.




II. THE AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES OF THE UNITED STATES.                       9


The land area of the United States, exclusive of Alaska and our island
possessions, is a little less than 3,000,000 square miles, or an area
somewhat less than the whole of Europe (3,700,000 square miles). Of
this about 840,000 square miles, or a little more than one-fourth,
still remains in the possession of the Federal Government and
constitutes the public domain. The rest belonged to the original
thirteen states, has been given to railways or to the states for
educational purposes, or has been sold and given away to individual
settlers. The policy of the Government in the disposition of the
public domain has, on the whole, been to place it as rapidly as
possible in the hands of cultivators, and also to use it as a fund to
promote internal improvements and education. About 200,000,000 acres
had been granted to railroads down to 1871, at which time land grants
were discontinued, to secure their early construction. This policy has
often been bitterly condemned, and it has been contended that the land
should have been saved for actual settlers. It may however be said
that without such grants the railroads would not have been built at as
early a date as they actually were, and that without railroads the
land was practically worthless, as it was too far removed from any
navigable waterway to have access to a market. Moreover, the Federal
Treasury lost nothing, for the sections of land alternating with those
granted to the railroads were sold to settlers for $2.50 an acre
instead of $1.25, the customary price for the public lands.

The grants of land for educational purposes have been generally
approved. Upon such grants rests the establishment of our state
agricultural colleges.

The unique and characteristic feature of the land policy of the United
States has been the granting of land to the settler upon actual
residence and cultivation for five years. Such a grant of 160 acres       10
is called a “homestead,” and since 1862 has been made to any citizen
who is the head of a family or above the age of twenty-one years. In
this way over 230,000,000 acres have been placed without cost in the
possession of the actual cultivators. The newer public land states are
peopled by proprietors, and there has never grown up in the United
States a large class of rich land owners whose land is cultivated by a
tenant peasant class, such as exists in England and parts of Europe.
For this we must thank not only our land policy, but also the vast
extent of unoccupied land that might be had almost for the asking.

Now, however, the public lands available for agriculture have been
exhausted; practically all that remains is situated in the arid zone,
and needs systematic irrigation before it can be made available for
any use except that of grazing. There are still about 100,000,000
acres of choice land in Indian reservations, and as a consequence of
the pressure upon this resource and also because of the unwisdom of
the old reservation system, the policy has now been adopted of
dividing these lands among the Indians in individual ownership, under
careful safeguards, and of assimilating the Indians to the rest of the
population.

The exhaustion of the fertile and well-watered lands of the
Mississippi Valley has forced the later comers to have recourse to the
arid soils in the almost rainless region west of the one hundredth
meridian of longitude. The character of farming under such climatic
conditions must of necessity be very different from what it is in the
rainy districts, and the versatility and adaptability of the American
farmer is well illustrated by the development which has taken place
there. The first effort at the solution of the problem was in
irrigation, a method which had been early practised by the Pueblo
Indians, and later and most successfully by the Mormon settlers in
Utah. By 1900, according to the census, 7,539,545 acres were under        11
irrigation. While most of the work up to that time had been done by
private initiative, a demand arose for irrigation at government
expense, in response to which Congress in 1902 provided for the
building of irrigation works out of the proceeds of the sales of
public lands. Regulation and conservation of the limited water supply
by governmental authority, either state or national, is indeed
essential to the success of irrigation and will probably be the policy
of the future.

A second and even more interesting development of American agriculture
is the so-called dry-farming which is being successfully introduced
into the semi-arid regions. Carefully selected seeds and plants of
crops especially adapted to these climatic conditions are used, and
then a very careful and intensive method of tillage is followed. The
soil is plowed deep and thoroughly pulverized so that the roots can
strike down to the deeper levels and absorb all the moisture
available. Extraordinary results have already been attained, and the
region that the older geographies labeled “The Great American Desert”
bids fair to become one of the most flourishing districts in the
country.

That part of the area of the United States which has already been
reduced to private ownership is divided into 5,700,000 farms. As
almost half of the land in these farms is uncultivated, being forest,
waste land, or pasture, it is evident that there is still room for a
great increase in the agricultural production of the United States
without bringing additional land into the field. The average size of
these farms is 146 acres, which looms large indeed when compared with
the 20-acre farms of France and the 60-acre farms of Great Britain.
The difference is of course due to the difference in the methods of
agriculture and the character of the crops, the European conditions
demanding intensive cultivation while our methods are still largely
extensive.

A more important question even than the number and size of farms, from    12
an economic point of view, is that of ownership. In 1880, when for the
first time the federal census collected the statistics of farm tenure,
the gratifying result was announced that three-quarters (74.5 per
cent) of the farms in the United States were cultivated by their
owners. The last census however showed that the proportion had fallen
to 64.7 per cent in 1900, and alarm has been expressed that our
democratic conditions of land ownership are giving way to a system of
tenantry, that the ownership of our farms is being concentrated in
fewer hands, and that methods of large-scale production in agriculture
are crushing out the independent farmer as effectively as they have
crowded out the small manufacturer and retailer in other fields.
Correctly interpreted, however, the statistics seem to indicate that
the growth of the tenant class marks the endeavor of farm laborers and
farmers’ sons to establish themselves as independent farmers rather
than the fall of former owners to the rank of tenants. The great
majority of the young men are laborers, the majority of those in
middle life are tenants, while the older men are for the most part
owners of farms. There seems to be a healthy progress upward in the
advancement of wage laborers and farmers’ children, first to tenancy,
and finally, with increased ability and capital, to farm ownership.
Moreover most of the rented farms are hired by negroes, the change in
whose status from slave to tenant marks a great advance.

Another change in our farming population that has been viewed with
considerable misgiving is the movement from the farm to the city and
the decline in the proportion of the agricultural population to the
whole. Indeed the change has been startling, as the United States has
passed from a primitive agricultural stage of development to a highly
organized manufacturing and commercial stage. From 86.3 per cent of
the population in 1820 the percentage of those engaged in agriculture     13
fell steadily until it reached 35.7 per cent in 1900. Many persons
have thought that such a movement indicated the desertion of our farms
owing to the greater attraction of the cities, and the disappearance
of a healthy agricultural population. It has indicated rather a great
improvement in the arts of agriculture, whereby one person today,
working with improved machinery and better knowledge, can produce
nearly three times as much as his grandfather did. The labor set free
has gone to the cities--cities of over 8,000 inhabitants now contain
one-third of our population as compared with one-thirtieth one hundred
years ago--and there produces the thousand and one things which
contribute to our modern well-being. A smaller number can now raise
all the food necessary to feed the population; that the rest are free
to do other things must certainly be counted again, though the
conditions under which work in the factory and life in the city are at
present constructed leave much to be desired.

Writing about 1865 an eminent English traveler, Sir S. Morton Pets,
apologized for calling the United States an agricultural country;
today he would be spared this worry, for the Census of 1900 gave the
net value of products of the farm as $3,764,000,000 and of pure
manufactures as $5,981,000,000. Indeed since 1890 the value of the
manufactures of the country has been larger than of the farm products,
and the United States now ranks as one of the leading manufacturing
nations of the world. Nevertheless the value and amount of the
agricultural products are stupendous; the United States leads all
countries in the production of dairy products, corn, and wheat, and
the greater part of the lumber, meats, tobacco, and cotton which enter
into the world’s trade come from her forests and fields.

While the territory of the United States is well adapted by nature to
the cultivation of a great variety of agricultural products, as a         14
matter of fact only four branches of agriculture showed a total
product in 1900 of more than one million dollars. These were the
raising of live stock, and the production of hay and grain, cotton,
and dairy produce. The regional distribution of these products was
fairly well marked, over half of the live stock and of the hay and
grain farms being situated in the North Central States, nearly half of
the dairy farms being located in the North Atlantic division, while
practically all the cotton is confined to the southern zone; the same
may also be said of tobacco and sugar. The semi-arid region of the
West is given over almost exclusively to stock-raising. Iowa and
Illinois lead as agricultural states.

The character of agriculture in the United States, as in all new
countries, has hitherto been extensive, that is, a small amount of
labor and capital has been applied to a relatively large amount of
land, and only the cream of the soil has been skimmed off, as it were.
Where labor is dear and land is cheap this is the most economical
method for the farmer; and, although European critics have severely
criticized our system of “earth butchery,” whereby the fertility of
the soil has been exhausted by constant cropping, with no effort to
restore the exhausted properties by fertilizing, the practice has been
justified by the conditions which produced it. Already the practical
exhaustion of the free public domain has had the effect of raising the
price of lands in the Middle West, and this in turn will cause a more
careful and intensive system of cultivation. In other words, as our
social and industrial conditions approach those of Europe more
closely, we may expect our agricultural methods to do so also. One of
the most serious practical problems now confronting the American
farmer is the change from the old, wasteful, extensive methods to the
new, careful, intensive methods of farming. Those who cannot make the
change will complain of the unprofitableness of agriculture, but to
those who successfully meet the new conditions the future offers          15
much greater rewards than even the era of free land could produce.

It has been said that the year 1887 marked the beginning of a new
stage of development in American agriculture--that of reorganization--
because in that year Congress passed the Experiment Station Act. This
marked the application of the principles of experimental science to
agriculture on a more comprehensive and systematic scale than had ever
been attempted before. Stimulated by the increased activity of the
government experiment stations, the agricultural colleges have
expanded their work. They are offering practical courses to the
farmers, and in co-operation with the railroads, some of them have
recently been sending out special lecturers, with moving laboratories,
to bring the teachings of science as close home to the producers as
possible. Finally, the wonderful work being done by Burbank and others
in selecting and crossing, by travelers for the federal Agricultural
Department in securing plants from all over the world suited to our
varied climatic conditions, and by the experiment stations and
agricultural colleges in spreading the new knowledge among the farmers
and putting it into actual practice--all these departures promise to
revolutionize agriculture, and to make it, as one writer has said, a
learned profession.

The production of cereals is the most important branch of agriculture,
comprising corn, wheat, oats, barley, rye, buckwheat, and rice. Since
the building of the trunk railroads, by which the western territory
was given access to a market, the progress of cereal production has
been extremely rapid, nor does there seem to be any observable
slackening. With the introduction of improved varieties of spring
wheat, cereal production is being pushed further up into British
Canada and our own Northwest. The center of cereal production has
moved steadily westward, from eastern Indiana in 1860 to eastern Iowa
in 1900. With the practical exhaustion of unoccupied land suitable
for grain-raising in the United States, it is clear that the future       16
extension of the industry depends rather upon improvements in the
methods of agriculture than upon the addition of new lands. The very
practical problem here presented to the American farmer if he wishes
to maintain his supremacy in the world’s markets is being nobly and
successfully met by the agricultural experiment stations. They are
teaching the farmer how to increase his yield of wheat, for example,
by scientific seed selection and more careful methods of tillage, from
an average of 12.5 bushels per acre for the whole country in 1900 to
treble that amount.

Of the separate crops corn is by far the most important, representing
60 per cent of the total value of all cereals produced in 1900. Most
of the corn is fed to stock throughout the so-called “corn belt” and
comes to market in the form of pork and beef. Although corn is very
nutritious and is a favorite article of diet in this country in
various forms, astonishingly little of it is exported. The development
of a foreign market still awaits the enterprise of the American farmer
and food manufacturer.

The production of live stock is essentially a frontier industry, and
while it will probably always be carried on in the semi-arid grazing
districts of the West, which can be reclaimed for agriculture only at
considerable expense, it already shows a relative decline. Owing to
the great growth of the population the domestic demand now consumes
almost all the meat produced and the exports are declining. This is
one of the reasons for the recent rise in the price of meat. The
industry is extensive. Quite the opposite is true of the dairy
industry, which is intensive, being carried on for the most part in
the vicinity of large cities where land is expensive. The changing
character of agriculture and the fact that it is itself a business
enterprise demanding a knowledge of market conditions and business
methods is well illustrated by the nature of the dairy industry.          17
Dairies are inspected and must conform to certain standards, the milk
must be sterilized and shipped, often by special trains, to the
cities. Over a third of the butter and practically all of the cheese
is now made in factories instead of on the farm, so that it is a
question whether the latter at least should not be classified as a
product of manufacture rather than of agriculture.

Of the last of the four important branches of agriculture, namely
cotton-raising, there is not so much to be said. Owing to the
intensive nature of its cultivation, machinery has never been applied
on a large scale to its production, as was done in the case of hay and
grain. The wasteful methods that prevailed before the Civil War in the
South have been largely corrected, and the tendency to sterility of
the soil has been met by the increased use of fertilizers. The
statistics of cotton crops for the past thirty years do not indicate
any decrease in productiveness, and show that the point of diminishing
returns has not yet been reached. A peculiar and interesting feature
about cotton production is that it is largely in the hands of tenants.
The old slave plantations of the South have been broken up into small
holdings and many of these are operated by tenants, negroes and
whites, who are too poor or too improvident to buy the land outright.
The main problems connected with cotton culture are labor problems;
and the question has often been anxiously asked whether the free negro
will produce as much as the former slave. This can now be confidently
answered in the affirmative, though it yet remains to be seen whether
he can be made as efficient a producer as his white competitor. Upon
the answer to that question depends not merely the future of cotton
production, but the economic salvation of the negro himself. The
constantly expanding use of cotton goods assures a brilliant future to
the cotton-growing states of the South, for not merely is there an
assured market in America and Europe, but the primitive peoples of
Asia and Africa may be depended upon to absorb increasing quantities      18
of cotton fabrics.

Hand in hand with the heedless extensive methods of agriculture in the
past went wasteful use and even destruction of our forest resources.
The annual cut of lumber in the United States is today about forty
billion feet board measure; at this rate of consumption it is
estimated that the present available supply will last only 35 to 50
years. It will doubtless surprise most readers to learn that about
three-quarters of the annual wood cut is consumed as fuel, probably
half of our population still depending upon wood instead of coal for
fuel. The rapid exhaustion of our forest supplies, with the attendant
effects upon moisture, floods, etc., has brought the question of
forest preservation to the front as a practical economic problem. We
have been squandering the heritage of our children and efforts are now
being made to repair some of the loss before we are declared bankrupt.
In 1898 the Federal Government began practical work in the
introduction of forestry; this received a great stimulus in 1905 when
the care of the national forest reserves, embracing over 60,000,000
acres, was put under the control of the Forest Service. Over 150
trained foresters are employed, who manage the forests on the public
lands and co-operate with private owners in the introduction of
scientific forestry. Several states have taken up the movement, and
there is every indication that scientific methods of culture such as
prevail in Prussia and other European states, will supplant our
destructive denudation of the land. That it is high time to devote
attention to the better conservation of this natural resource is made
evident by the high and increasing price of lumber.

There is one other natural resource the conditions of whose supply
resemble those of forestry and of agriculture in general; this is the
fisheries. With careful use, providing for depreciation, and restoring
the elements destroyed, all of these should prove inexhaustible and       19
should continue to furnish man with food and lumber for all time. But
as in the case of the other two industries, so with the fisheries, we
have been using up our capital and declaring enormous dividends at the
expense of the future. The value of the annual catch of fish is
$40,000,000, which is exceeded only by that of Great Britain. The
problem of the better conservation of this resource has been taken in
hand by the Federal Government, through the Fish Commission, and much
has been done to repair our early prodigality by restocking lakes and
streams with fish. More stringent fish and game laws have also been
passed by most of the states, designed to prevent the extermination of
the supply.




III. THE MINERAL RESOURCES OF THE UNITED STATES.


The natural resources of any country may be divided into two broad
groups, which call for different treatment and give rise to very
different problems. There are, on the one hand, resources which are
exhaustible but which can be restored again; and on the other,
resources which, once exhausted, can never be replaced again by human
agency. Under the first head come the soil, the forests, the
fisheries, and even the water power, for all of these can be made to
yield steady returns to man for thousands of years, if used
intelligently. Under the second head belong coal, petroleum, natural
gas, and all the minerals; man may discover substitutes, he may
economize in the use of these substances, but he can never augment
their supply. In the previous section we considered some of the
problems that arise in the use of the soil in agriculture, and those
connected with our forests and fisheries. For the most part they had
to do with the intelligent use of these agencies and the restoration
or repair of the elements destroyed. In this section we are met by a
very different problem, namely, the conservation of a limited supply      20
of resources and their most economical application to the needs of
mankind.

We can distinguish two contrasting answers to this problem, one
careless and optimistic, and the other pessimistic and fearful of the
future. According to the former point of view we should not borrow
trouble of the future; man’s career has been one of constant progress;
when he has been confronted with a difficulty he has invariably met
it. Indeed necessity has been the most prolific mother of invention.
If our coal supplies are exhausted, man will devise means of utilizing
the heat of the sun, the force of the tides, the motion of the waves,
the stores of electrical energy in the air, all of which will yield
inexhaustible supplies of heat and energy. If our stores of iron
should fail, some enterprising inventor would surely discover a
practicable and commercially profitable method of extracting aluminum
from clay. New sources of raw materials will undoubtedly be discovered
before the old ones give out, and we may confidently expect that,
while the material bases of a high civilization may shift somewhat,
they will never crumble and fall.

The other school has sounded a louder note of alarm. At the present
rate of consumption the coal and iron deposits of Europe and America
must soon be exhausted. The supplies of copper, lead, and other metals
in favorable locations are also being consumed at an alarming rate,
and no other known supplies are in sight. Within the past century
scientific knowledge and engineering skill have combined to unlock the
storehouses of the geologic ages, and now like prodigals we are
dissipating our fortunes. To treat these exhaustible sources of supply
as permanent sources of income, without regard for the future, is
based upon unsound theory and must lead to reckless practice.

As so often in opposing counsels, there is an element of truth in each    21
of these contrasting points of view. But the safer plan is not to wait
until we have exhausted our natural resources before remedying the
evil, but to heed the warnings now. A long step in this direction was
taken in May, 1908, when a conference of the governors of all the
states, together with college and railroad presidents, business men
and others, was held at the White House upon invitation of President
Roosevelt. As a result of this gathering a National Conservation
Commission was appointed, which will make an exhaustive investigation
into the amount and rate of consumption of the natural resources of
the country and suggest measures for their better utilization and
preservation through national, state, and local action. In line with
this movement two other commissions have been established, one on
inland waterways and one on country life. As a result of the national
awakening we may expect to see a more rational use made of the gifts
of nature, and a better organization of our national life. Heretofore
the ideal of our business men has been to exploit, one might almost
say pillage, the stores of nature as rapidly as possible; it was a
pioneer stage of industry, inevitable but wasteful. From now on the
new conception must be the restoration where possible of exhausted
elements, as of the soil and the forests, and the careful use of the
non-renewable stores of wealth so that at least we shall not make them
engines of destruction, as in the case of floods and devastation
occasioned by careless hydraulic mining in the West. Let us now turn
to a more detailed consideration of the separate items in our
inventory of national wealth.

Our modern civilization may be said to rest upon coal, for upon its
possession depends man’s ability to utilize most of the other items of
his wealth. Passing over its utility as a fuel to heat our houses,
without coal it would be impossible to smelt the iron needed in all
our industries, to drive the machinery, to run our locomotives or         22
steamboats, or in a word to carry on the manifold activities of our
industrial life. According to the United States Geological Survey
there are 335,000 square miles of coal-bearing strata in this country,
but the larger part of it is too thin or impure to be useful for
industrial purposes; it serves in many localities however as domestic
fuel, as in the case of the lignite deposits of the Northwest. An
estimate of Professor Tarr places the coal-producing area in the
United States at not over 50,000 square miles. At the present rate of
consumption--over 350,000,000 tons in 1905--it has been estimated that
the anthracite coal deposits will last for only fifty years longer,
while we have only enough bituminous coal for one hundred years.

The large deposits of coal in England and their early development gave
that country a great advantage over Europe. But as long ago as 1861
Professor Jevons, a noted English economist, sounded a note of alarm:
he prophesied that because of the superior size and character of the
coal deposits of America, industrial supremacy must inevitably pass to
this country. His prediction has already been verified in the case of
coal and iron production, and will probably soon prove true of
textiles also. The coal deposits of the United States are thirty-seven
times as great as those of England, but at the present rate of mining
are threatened with exhaustion at no distant date. It has been
estimated that there are in China coal deposits capable of supplying
the world with fuel for another thousand years. But such estimates
are, in the present state of our knowledge about China, the merest
guesses, and if true would seem to point rather to the future
industrial supremacy of that country in the world’s markets.

Two-thirds of the coal mined in the United States is obtained from the
Appalachian field, extending from New York to Alabama, Pennsylvania
being the largest coal-producing state in the Union. In the iron and
steel industries most of the coal is coked, as it is better for           23
blast-furnace use in this form, giving greater heat and containing
less sulphur or other injurious substances than coal. Owing to the
smaller bulk and cost of transporting ore, most of the iron and steel
industries are situated in the vicinity of the coal supply, as in
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Alabama, etc.

Petroleum or coal-oil is closely allied to coal in its origin and
distribution and must be classed with it as a most important product,
not only for industrial uses, but also because of the contributions it
has made to the comforts of living. In its production the United
States ranks first, being closely followed by Russia; together these
two countries furnish over 90 per cent of the world’s supply of
petroleum. Enormous economies have been effected in its production and
distribution, which is done by piping the crude oil underground to the
refineries. For illuminating purposes it is the cheapest form of
artificial light; as a fuel it is supplanting coal, where the latter
is dear or its cost of carriage high, as on ocean steamers. Finally,
the construction of light and convenient gasoline motors has given it
great importance as a source of motive power. Natural gas is closely
related to petroleum, but the supply has been so reduced by rapid and
reckless use that it has but a limited economic outlook and is of
local significance only.

Of all the metals iron must be considered the most useful for man, far
surpassing the so-called precious metals in economic importance. Its
great value is so evident that its production and use have often been
taken as a criterion of the material progress of a community. Iron is
the only metal that can be welded, and is accordingly of great
significance, whether in making strong machinery, as the shafts of
ocean steamships or the framework of a twenty-story building, or, in
the form of steel, the most delicate surgical instruments or watch
springs. Judged by the test of iron ore production the United States      24
ranks high, for it turns out about four-fifths of the world’s supply;
all of this is used for domestic consumption, in its own blast
furnaces, though much of it is afterwards exported in the form of pig
iron or structural iron or steel. Though iron is universally
distributed throughout creation, it must occur in large beds or
deposits before it can be profitably mined. “The most favorable
situation of an iron ore for profitable extraction is near good coking
coal for smelting and limestone for a flux, as in the Birmingham
district of Alabama; and in such a situation even low-grade ores can
be worked profitably. Unless this is the case, iron ore cannot be
extensively mined excepting under conditions of great abundance and
economical methods of transportation, as in the Lake Superior
district, where thick and remarkably uniform beds of good ore occur in
such a position that water transportation to the market is possible.
Where these conditions do not exist, iron-mining is feasible only on a
small scale for the local market. Thus, in the Rocky Mountains there
are almost inexhaustible supplies of iron, often of a high grade,
which are at present of no value whatsoever.”[1]

The most wonderful iron-mining region in the United States and
probably in the world lies in the northern part of Michigan and
Minnesota, where five ranges or lines of hills contain immense
deposits. These lie so near the surface that they can be dug out of
open pits at a cost of from 10 to 50 cents a ton, against $1 a ton in
a shaft or underground mine. Three-quarters of the iron ore produced
in the United States is mined in this district. Its proximity to the
lake ports makes possible its transportation to the iron and steel
manufacturing centers at very low rates. Machinery has been applied on
an immense scale to the work of mining, loading and unloading the ore.
Steam shovels scoop up the ore from the open pit, filling cars at the     25
rate of almost one a minute; the work of loading this into the ore
ships at the ports is equally expeditious, only about two hours being
required to load an ore ship of 6,000 tons, while the work of
unloading is performed for the most part by an endless chain of
buckets and traveling cranes. By these means an ultra-intensive
exploitation of these magnificent deposits is taking place and it is a
question whether they will not soon be exhausted. “But the Americans,”
writes Professor Leroy-Beaulieu, a friendly but keen critic of our
industrial development, “relying on the constant good-will of nature,
are confident that they will discover either new and productive ranges
in this district, or rich deposits in other districts.”

The precious metals have received more than their fair share of
attention, for the industrial progress of the world is much less
dependent upon their presence in large and easily obtained quantities
than it is upon the more common metals. Nevertheless they are of
importance both in the arts and especially because of their use as
money. In their production the United States stands second, being
surpassed in the output of gold by the Transvaal in Africa and in that
of silver by Mexico. The production of these metals has always in the
world’s history proceeded spasmodically, and a speculative spirit has
usually been present. More recently, however, scientific geological
knowledge and improved metallurgical methods are removing the industry
of gold and silver mining from a gambling venture to a legitimate
industry. The practical problem at present confronting American
gold-mining companies is to reduce expenses, some of the principal
bearings having for some years shown signs of exhaustion, as for
instance in the Cripple Creek district of Colorado. There is always a
chance however that new gold fields may be discovered to make good the
exhaustion of the old. In the case of silver, on the other hand, the
metal is found in such abundance that the present rate of production      26
seems almost indefinitely assured; a slight increase of the price or
improvements in the art of extracting the metal will at any time bring
enlarged supplies on the market. Africa, Australia, and the United
States produce almost all the world’s supply of gold, Colorado being
the leading state in the last-named country. Mexico and the United
States together produce over two-thirds of the world’s silver, the
leading rank in this country being held by Montana.

Among the other metals copper is by far the most important. In
primitive civilizations, before the art of smelting iron had been
discovered, copper was indispensable as it was so easily malleable; in
Homeric times, for instance, armor, utensils, money, etc., were made
of copper or alloys of copper (bronze and brass). After an eclipse of
some centuries copper has again risen to the front rank by reason of
its qualities as a conductor of electricity. The new use of
electricity to transmit power and the development of electrical
industries has greatly increased the demand for this metal and has
caused a great expansion in its production. Here again the United
States holds first rank, contributing over half of the world’s copper
supply. As in the case of iron the northern peninsula of Michigan is
the most important center of copper production, with Montana a close
second and Arizona contributing most of the remainder. Like petroleum,
copper production is controlled by a small number of operators, five
mining companies alone furnishing one-half of the American supply. It
is far from being monopolized, however, as petroleum is, for new and
rich supplies lie just on the margin of profitable working and will
always be brought into the market whenever the price is artificially
raised. One reason for American pre-eminence, aside from the rich
stores of the metal, lies in the progress made in the art of refining
it by the electrolytic process, considerable foreign ore being brought
here to be treated by this method.

Nature has not blessed the United States so abundantly with the minor     27
metals, lead, zinc, and aluminum, while almost all the tin used here
has to be imported.

It is apparent from even this brief and hasty survey of the mineral
resources of the United States, comprising those extractive industries
which once exhausted can never be restored by man, that this country
is wonderfully well equipped with the material means of civilization.
Minerals and metals are remarkably abundant and accessible. The
wonderful material progress of the United States during the nineteenth
century is abundantly explained by this fact, though due credit must
also be given to the enterprise, industry, and genius of those who
developed these natural resources. The industrial supremacy of the
American nation seems well assured, founded on such a stable material
basis. We of this country have been rather inclined to boast of our
industrial progress and our material bigness, whereas it must now be
apparent that we owe much, if not most, to the bounty of nature. We
should therefore see to it, in a proper spirit of humility and
thoughtfulness, that we do not waste our heritage, but hand it on as
nearly undiminished as possible to our children.

There is one other asset in our national wealth which has already
contributed much to our progress, and is destined to play an even more
important role in the future--and that is our water power. In colonial
days, before the invention of the steam engine and the use of coal,
this was of prime importance and determined the location of many a
town, most of them being located at the “fall line” of the rivers,
where water power was obtainable. With the invention of the steam
engine and the use of steam as a motive power, industry became less
dependent upon water power and moved away from the rivers to the
vicinity of coal mines. Now again has come another swing of the
pendulum, and with the rise of electricity as a motive power and the
harnessing of our streams and waterfalls for the creation of              28
electrical energy, we are beginning to value more highly this source
of power. Here again we find the United States wonderfully blessed as
compared with other countries. “It is probable,” says Shaler, “that,
measured in horse power or by manufactured products, the energy
derived from the streams of this country is already more valuable than
those of all other lands put together.” The total amount of direct
water power used by manufacturing establishments in 1900 was 1,727,000
horsepower.

Prior to 1890 the largest use of water power was in its direct
application to machinery at the immediate point of development. Since
that time, however, the use of electricity as an agency whereby the
energy developed by falling water can be transformed and applied to
the driving of machinery has entirely changed the conditions under
which the power of our streams can be utilized. The practical
possibility of transmitting electrical power over long distances--for
example, over 200 miles from the Sierras to San Francisco--has removed
the necessity of building factories immediately adjacent to water
powers, but permits its utilization where most convenient and often
where the lack of coal has made the use of steam power impracticable.
The best-known example of the development and transmission of
electrical energy for industrial purposes is the case of Niagara
Falls, but more striking illustrations may be found on the Pacific
coast, while the existence of enormous opportunities on the Atlantic
seaboard give brilliant promise for the future of manufacturing in
this region. So valuable indeed are these sources of power now seen to
be that there is danger that their control may be monopolized by a few
shrewd and far-sighted individuals before the general public awakes to
a realization of their importance. It has recently been asserted in a
reputable magazine that there is a “water power trust” already
organized for this purpose. The opportunities for wealth-getting have
hitherto been so great in this country, and the great task of the         29
American people has thus far been so exclusively the task of
developing its wonderful natural resources, that we have grown
careless of our common rights and have permitted the monopolization by
private individuals of a number of limited resources of this
character. One of the great practical problems of the future is that
of securing the growing value of these natural monopolies to the whole
people, without at the same time retarding the energy and industrial
development of the American people.




IV. CAPITALISTIC PRODUCTION.


Modern production is usually called capitalistic because it involves
in its processes the use of a large amount of capital. In a primitive
stage of culture man appropriated directly from nature’s bounty the
food and shelter which he required. But today man has adopted long and
roundabout methods of producing goods, involving numerous steps
between his first efforts and the turning out of the finished
articles. He invents tools and machinery to assist him in his work,
and while he multiplies the processes of production he also enormously
increases the results. Capital has become absolutely indispensable in
modern production and is yearly playing a more important role. At the
same time various problems, born of the new conditions, have arisen,
such as the growth of large-scale production, the elimination of the
small producer and the independent artisan, the growth of trusts, the
rhythmic recurrence of speculative periods and industrial crises, the
relations of labor and capital, and others similar in character.

The most striking phenomenon of the nineteenth century was the great
industrial progress of the more developed nations; this is best shown
in a table taken from Mulhall’s “Industries and Wealth of Nations,”
which follows:

  Growth of Manufactures in the Nineteenth Century.                       30

  ====================================================
                  |       Millions of Dollars.
  Countries       |-----------------------------------
                  |  1820  |  1840  |  1860  |  1894
  ----------------+--------+--------+--------+--------
  United Kingdom  |  1,411 |  1,883 |  2,808 |  4,263
  France          |  1,168 |  1,606 |  2,092 |  2,900
  Germany         |    900 |  1,484 |  1,995 |  3,357
  Austria         |    511 |    852 |  1,129 |  1,596
  Other States    |  1,654 |  2,516 |  3,455 |  5,236
  Europe          |  5,644 |  8,341 | 11,479 | 17,352
  United States   |    268 |    467 |  1,907 |  9,498
  ----------------+--------+--------+--------+--------
      Total       |  5,912 |  8,808 | 13,386 | 26,850
  ----------------------------------------------------

Extraordinary as has been this universal growth, the development of
manufactures in the United States has been still more marvelous, both
absolutely and in relation to other branches of industry  Between 1850
and 1900 the population and the products of agriculture both trebled;
but the value of manufactured products increased twelvefold and that
of capital invested in manufactures nineteenfold The United States,
though politically younger than the countries of Europe, is
industrially one of the most advanced  The application of labor-saving
machinery and of improved and economical methods of production and
distribution has probably proceeded further here than in any other
place  Nowhere can we study to better advantage, therefore, than in
America the problems that have grown out of this advanced capitalism.

The causes of this rapid industrial development are enumerated by the
census report as five in number: the agricultural resources of the
country, the mineral resources, the highly developed transportation
facilities, the freedom of trade between states and territories, and
the absence of inherited and over-conservative ideas  We have already
considered the wonderful agricultural and mineral resources of the
country, and have seen how greatly the American people are indebted
for their industrial prosperity to the bounty of nature. The              31
magnificent system of inland waterways, comprising over 18,000 miles
of navigable rivers, and the railroad system, with over 200,000 miles
of track, facilitate a rapid and cheap exchange of products. The
enormous domestic market afforded the American manufacturer, larger in
consuming capacity than that in any other country in the world, has
permitted the economic production of goods on a large scale and a
consequent reduction in cost. Foreigners have often asked the question
why, if freedom from tariffs and trade restraints has been a good
thing within the United States, freedom of trade with other countries
would not prove equally advantageous. In answer to this, James G.
Blaine, formerly Secretary of State, wrote, “It is the enjoyment of
free trade and protection at the same time which has contributed to
the unexampled development and marvelous prosperity of the United
States.” Finally, the absence of tradition and of over-conservative
ideas handed down from a former and more primitive system of industry
has been a great boon. There have been developed traits of energy,
inventiveness, and ingenuity, which, aided by a universal system of
compulsory free education, have contributed greatly to the material
progress of the people.

The system under which the production of wealth in a modern industrial
nation is carried on is usually called the factory system, and to this
we must now turn, for it is in the factory that the utilization of
machinery and capital finds its greatest development. The term is not
easily defined, but we may adopt the description given by the late
Carroll D. Wright: “A factory is an establishment where several
workmen are collected for the purpose of obtaining greater and cheaper
conveniences of labor than they could procure in their own homes, for
producing results by their combined efforts which they could not
accomplish separately, and for preventing the loss occasioned by
carrying articles from place to place during the several necessary        32
processes to complete their manufacture.” The essential elements in
such a system are the minute division of labor, the large use of
labor-saving machinery, the increasing specialization and localization
of industry, and the concentration of production in fewer and larger
establishments with consequent increase of product and reduction of
cost.

The division of labor may mean either the separation of occupation or
the division of a process into minute parts. An illustration of
separation of occupations may be found in the manufacture of a
carriage: one factory produces hubs, another wheels, a third axles, a
fourth the body, a fifth manufactures upholstery, a sixth the
hardware, and a seventh (the carriage factory, so-called) assembles
the parts and places the completed product on the market in the form
of a carriage.

As an example of an extreme division of labor the slaughtering and
meat-packing industry offers a classical example, though in this case
the use of complex machinery is not involved. “It would be difficult,”
writes Professor Commons,[2] “to find another industry where division
of labor has been so ingeniously and microscopically worked out. The
animal has been surveyed and laid off like a map; and the men have
been classified in over thirty specialties and twenty rates of pay,
from 16 cents to 50 cents an hour. The 50-cent man is restricted to
using the knife on the most delicate parts of the hide (floorman) or
to using the axe in splitting the backbone (splitter) and, wherever a
less skilled man can be slipped in at 18 cents, 18½ cents, 20
cents, 21 cents, 22½ cents, 24 cents, 25 cents, and so on, a place
is made for him, and an occupation mapped out. In working on the hide
alone there are nine positions, at eight different rates of pay. A
20-cent man pulls off the tail, a 22½-cent man pounds off another
part where the hide separates readily, and the knife of the 40-cent
man cuts a different texture and has a different ‘feel’ from that of      33
the 50-cent man. Skill has become specialized to fit the anatomy.”

Usually, however, when the division of labor becomes as minute as that
described, the routine-like process is handed over to a machine.
Indeed Mr. John A. Hobson states as a law of machine industry the fact
that as soon as a process becomes perfectly automatic and mechanical a
machine is invented which can do the work better and more rapidly than
human hands. Hand in hand, therefore, with the subdivision of labor
goes the extension of labor-saving machinery. Labor becomes relatively
of less importance than capital in the new methods of production, and
man becomes a machine tender rather than an independent producer.
There are practical benefits and disadvantages connected with this
system. Many writers insist that the effect on the worker is narrowing
in the extreme, but Professor Marshall points out that his labor as
tender of a machine demands a higher order of intellectual development
than that of a handicraftsman, and that he has more leisure, while the
product of the present system is immeasurably greater than under the
old hand methods. The manufacture of products by machinery has in turn
required the making of machines by machinery, as the complex machines
of today could not be turned out by hand methods. A characteristic
feature of the modern factory system therefore has been the growth of
the machine trades, which supply the equipment of the new industry.

With the growing specialization of industry there has gone on an
increasing localization in some favored spot or locality. Thus most of
the collars and cuffs (85 per cent) manufactured in the United States
are made in Troy, N. Y.; 64 per cent of the oyster canning is carried
on in Baltimore; 54 per cent of the gloves are made in Gloversville,
N. Y.; 48 per cent of the coke in Connellsville, Pa.; 48 per cent of      34
the brassware in Waterbury, Conn.; and 46 per cent of the carpets in
Philadelphia. While there are undoubted advantages in such
localization and specialization in a particular industry, such as
reputation, growth of special skill, etc., there are also offsetting
disadvantages, as the complete prostration of the whole community if
the particular trade upon which it depends is disastrously affected by
trade depression or by a shifting of the industry to some other
locality.

More striking than the concentration of manufactures in particular
places has been its concentration in a few large establishments and
under the control of fewer individuals. Without entering into the
discussion, as yet, of the trust problem, we may at this time take up
the earlier and important tendency of industry to be conducted on a
large scale. This concentration into a relatively smaller number of
establishments has been going on pretty steadily since 1850 and shows
no signs of abatement at this time. In the case of the iron and steel
industries, cotton manufactures, and leather goods, the movement is
positively startling, an actual decrease in the number of
establishments having occurred in the half century. This is most
marked in the monopolized industries. At the same time there has gone
on an enormous increase in the size of the individual plant, in the
capital employed, the number of men employed, and the value of the
product. Almost the only industries which have not yet displayed this
tendency are those which are essentially local in their nature, as
grist mills, cheese and butter factories, etc. But in general it is
characteristic of manufactures in the United States. The same tendency
has been manifest in the countries of Europe, though there a system of
well-developed and fairly vigorous hand trades has resisted the
movement and made the development in this respect much less rapid than
in this country.

Large-scale production is more profitable than production on a small      35
scale in all industries which are subject to increasing returns. By
this is meant that the return in product for each additional dollar’s
worth of labor and capital employed grows greater the larger the scale
on which the enterprise is conducted. When this is true the big
enterprise will be able to undersell the little enterprises and
eventually to drive them out of business. This is true not only in the
competitive industries, but also in those which enjoy a legal or a
natural monopoly, as street railways, gas and water plants, etc., all
of which show an irresistible tendency to consolidation. Before
drawing any conclusions as to the desirability of such a movement, let
us examine some of the economies of large-scale production. The most
striking and the most important is the economy in fixed capital.
Concentration is a result of machine production. As machinery becomes
more expensive, the breaking up of the processes of manufacture into
small parts requires more complex and detailed machinery; a larger
outlay is requisite for an up-to-date plant. Thus the average amount
of capital invested in each iron and steel establishment in the United
States increased from $47,000 in 1850 to $858,000 in 1900. The head of
a steel company in Pittsburg recently testified before the Industrial
Commission that to build and equip a plant for the manufacture of iron
and steel under modern conditions would call for an investment of from
$20,000,000 to $30,000,000. It is clear that under such conditions of
expensive machine methods a small plant would have little chance of
existence. Steam railways afford another good illustration of an
industry in which enormous economies are effected by the concentration
of a number of small, independent lines under one unified control.
Every machine is utilized to the utmost; there is no needless
duplication of machinery such as would occur if several small plants
divided up the business, while expensive machines to carry on             36
relatively small processes can be profitably installed.

But other economies than those in the use of capital are present in
large-scale production. A large concern can hire more expensive and
better managers, can afford to experiment with new methods, can effect
a more minute and economical division of labor, as for example in the
slaughtering business above referred to. A striking economy can also
be effected in the utilization of what were formerly waste products,
and still are in small concerns. This has been carried furthest in the
oil-refining and meat-packing industries; a recent statement of Swift
and Co., for instance, alleged that the dividends on the stock were
paid out of the by-products, such as neatsfoot oil, land fertilizer,
glue, fats, etc. Owing, however, to the generally wasteful methods
prevailing in the United States not so much attention has been given
to this point as in England and Germany. A final economy may be
mentioned that can be secured by a large business, namely, carrying on
allied or subsidiary processes. Thus the Standard Oil Company builds
its own pipe lines, makes its own barrels, tin cans, pumps, tanks,
sulphuric acid, etc.

Such an extension in the size of the single establishment would of
course not have been possible if improvements in the arts of
communication and transportation had not at the same time immensely
widened the market. As long as the market was local, and a factory
could afford to send its goods over only a limited territory there was
of course a fixed limit to the expansion of that industry. Now,
however, when markets are often world-wide and the demand for goods
has so enormously increased, while the modern railway and steamship
can transport goods cheaply and quickly half around the globe,
enterprises can be expanded and carried on on a scale commensurate
with the expanded market and improved methods. It is clear then that
the tendency to production on a large scale is the logical result of      37
machine methods, that it secures great economies, and that in
industries of increasing returns it is absolutely inevitable.

But not only in manufacturing is this movement observable. More
recently concentration in large establishments has revolutionized the
retail trade. Department stores have supplanted the small shops
because they can buy on better terms, get transportation cheaper,
offer a greater variety to the customer at a lower price, and save
time and trouble to the customer. The growing ease of communication
with central shopping districts, the rapid changes in fashion with the
consequent large variety which only a large establishment could afford
to carry--all these factors have helped along the movement. There are
limits to such a movement, for small tradesmen will always hold the
repairing trades, and the sale of perishable goods; thus there are no
businesses so scattered as the small stores of the “butchers and
grocers.” But on the whole we may safely conclude that the small
storekeeper is doomed now just as the small manufacturer was two or
three decades ago. In the carrying trade country carriers and a few
cabmen in the cities are the only survivals of the small independent
business; the steam railroad and the electric railway have driven the
small carrier out of business. In agriculture alone, where
concentration is strictly limited by the necessity for intensive
cultivation, and in professional and personal service, where the very
nature of the business prevents it, is there little or no development
in the direction of large-scale methods.

The industrial and social effects of this development have been marked
in all countries. In the United States the main attention has been
given to the organization and development of machinery, and a
wonderful industrial advance has followed the movement. The economic
readjustments have consequently been made with comparative ease, and
the labor set free by the invention of new machines has been              38
reabsorbed in the same or other industries. Consequently the social
effects have not been so marked as to call for special emphasis; as
the same question presents itself, however, in connection with the
more recent trust movement we may profitably defer its discussion to
the next section.

There is one other characteristic feature of modern capitalistic
machine industry which deserves special mention, especially as its
development has been carried furthest in the United States. Reference
is made to the system of standardization and of interchangeable parts.
In no single feature is the contrast between modern machine methods
and those of the old hand trades greater. By standardization is meant
the production of so-called “standard products” according to some
acceptable size, form, or shape. In the manufacture of screws or iron
beams, or even ready-made clothing, for example, certain dimensions
and sizes which are best adapted for general use, are selected as
standard sizes and these are then turned out in large quantities by
automatic machinery. The advantages of such a system, in cheapness,
quickness of delivery, ability to replace a single broken part, etc.,
are numerous and manifest. “The possibilities of standardization are
strikingly shown in a recent international incident. The Egyptian
Government desired a bridge for the Atbara at the earliest possible
moment; inquiry was made of the English bridgemakers, but no promise
of prompt delivery could be secured. Within twenty-seven days after
the tender of the contract was made to an American firm the bridge was
ready for shipment. The feat, not a remarkable one, was due to the
standardization of bridge material. This in itself was a guarantee of
quick delivery and construction.”[3]

Standardization was followed by the system of interchangeable parts,
according to which each part of an intricate machine or product is        39
made exactly like the same part in every other machine. The parts can
thus be turned out in large quantities and “assembled” at a single
operation. From the standpoint of the consumer or user of the machines
thus made, the great merit of the system lies in the fact that he can
quickly and at small expense duplicate any broken part. It is today
applied to almost every product of large consumption, from
agricultural implements and steam engines to watches and nails. By
producing machinery on this plan it has been possible for American
manufacturers to extend their trade very materially in foreign lands.
It was recently reported in the newspapers that Mr. E. H. Harriman had
expended $65,000,000 in standardizing the equipment on his railroad
systems; while this sum is enormous, it will undoubtedly be justified
by the increased economy of repairs and operation.




V. TRUSTS AND MONOPOLIES.


We have already seen how production upon a large scale has superseded
production upon a small scale in most important branches of
manufactures. We have now to inquire whether production upon a large
scale is in turn to be supplanted by single consolidated enterprises,
by those combinations of capital known as trusts. Under one of these
three conditions industry must be carried on; few people wish to
revert to the stage when production was carried on in small
establishments, but warm controversy and difference of opinion still
exist as to whether centralized management by a single company or
combination offers superior advantages to production by independent
competing establishments. The concentration of production in a few
large establishments has been followed by the consolidation of these
larger units into a single whole. Since the days of Adam Smith capital
has tended to combine for the purpose of fixing prices, and these         40
combinations have passed through several phases. The earliest form is
the agreement of independent concerns to fix prices, as was done by
the American railroads in their early traffic agreements. The next
step was to divide the field, as has been done by the French railways
and the American express companies. A third phase of combination was
the pool, which attempted to regulate the output rather than to fix
the price or divide the field. Railway, whisky, beam, and other pools
were organized for this purpose, but all broke down because of the
difficulty of enforcing the agreement and the temptations to each
member to break it secretly for the sake of the large profits
obtainable. By this time it had become clear that if a real permanent
consolidation of interests was to be secured by the competing
enterprises some closer form of combination must be devised which
could not be broken at will by any member. An industrial union and not
a loose confederation must be attained. Accordingly the next step was
taken in 1882 by the formation of the Standard Oil Trust, so called
because the constituent concerns handed over their business to the
complete control of a central board of trustees, receiving in return
trust certificates which entitled them to dividends. Similar “trusts”
were formed in the whisky, sugar, and other industries, but were
speedily declared illegal by the federal Supreme Court. By this
decision the form of combination was changed, but the movement was not
at all checked. The next phase and the last was the establishment of
holding corporations, which are organized to buy up and hold the stock
of a number of individual corporations, which still retain their
corporate existence. In this way unity of control is secured, to which
is added a certain flexibility; but it is really the trust under
another legal form. Where pooling and combination by means of holding
companies have been forbidden by law, as in the case of railroad
companies, actual consolidation has often taken place, though when        41
trusts are spoken of the other form of combination is more often
meant. From the point of view of business organization the holding
company is simply an extension of the principle of the corporation,
and to a consideration of this we must therefore turn.

There are three classes of establishments by which industry is carried
on--those that are the property of an individual, those which belong
to partnerships or firms of unlimited liability, and those belonging
to corporations of limited liability. The usefulness of the individual
system is of course limited to small undertakings, where but little
capital and credit are necessary; this form of organization still
dominates the field in agriculture, in the small retail trade, and in
the repairing industries. The partnership is a joint undertaking by
two or more individuals, and makes larger enterprises possible, but as
each individual is liable for all obligations of the firm or his
partners his personal liability is greatly increased. While it is well
adapted to certain undertakings, as moderate mercantile establishments
and professional firms, owing to a certain elasticity in the
contractual relations of its members, it is not suited to large
industrial ventures, both because of the excessive personal liability,
and because of the necessity of dissolving the partnership upon the
death, withdrawal, or insolvency of any member. The advantage of the
corporation lies in the fact that it has a continuous existence, and
that the liability of the shareholders is limited to the amount of
capital actually contributed by each; it is well adapted to modern
enterprise because it permits the summation of large amounts of
capital from a number of small savers and centralizes the use of this
capital in the most economical manner. There may thus be concentration
of management without concentration of ownership. The federal census
of manufactures in 1905 showed that, although less than one-quarter of
the manufacturing establishments were organized as corporations, yet
they produced three-quarters of the total manufactures in money           42
value. In the field of transportation, corporations are in almost
exclusive control, most banks and insurance companies are organized
under this form, while mercantile and industrial undertakings are
being more and more generally organized as corporations. Not merely
are most of our business enterprises being conducted under corporate
form and organization, but most recently, as has been already pointed
out, there has been a movement to combine individual corporations into
larger concerns, or trusts. The trust is usually thought of as a
monopoly and, while not necessarily so, it usually does exercise
monopoly control; but for the present we shall consider the trust
problem from the standpoint of business organization, deferring to the
end of the section the discussion of monopoly.

The trust movement may be said to have begun with the formation of the
Standard Oil Trust in 1882, but down to 1898 its progress was slow.
Beginning with the revival of prosperity in 1898, however, there
ensued a veritable stampede of business managers to enter into
combinations. During the next three years 149 large combinations, with
a capital of over $3,000,000,000, were formed. The movement spent most
of its force by 1902, though it is by no means at an end yet, as the
recent floating of the Dry Goods Trust indicates. A few figures from
reliable authorities will make clear the extent of the movement.
According to the New York Journal of Commerce, industrial (i.e.,
manufacturing and commercial) and gas trusts were organized in the
United States between 1860 and 1900, not including combinations in
banking, shipping, railroads, etc., as shown in the accompanying
table.

Another more recent list by John Moody[4] gives the number of
“industrial” trusts organized down to Jan. 1, 1904, as 318; these have

  -----------------+------------+---------------                          43
      Decade.      |   Number   | Total Nominal
                   | Organized. |    Capital.
  -----------------+------------+---------------
      1860-69      |       2    | $   13,000,000
      1870-79      |       4    |    135,000,000
      1880-89      |      18    |    288,000,000
      1890-99      |     157    |  3,150,000,000
  -----------------+------------+---------------
   Total, 40 years |     181    | $3,586,000,000
  -----------------+------------+---------------

acquired or control 5,288 plants, and have a total nominal capital of
$7,246,342,533. A movement so general and widespread, and of such
gigantic proportions, must have had some powerful and intelligible
causes behind. For it was not confined to the United States, but was
equally observable in such industrial diverse countries as England,
France, Germany, Russia, and other European nations.

The most important and general cause was the desire to secure the
legitimate economies of large-scale production. A combined or
federated industry may secure even greater economies than a single
large factory. These have been concisely stated as follows[5]: “The
cost of management, amount of stock carried, advertising, cost of
selling the product, may all be smaller per unit of product. A large
aggregation can control credit better and escape loss from bad debts.
By regulating and equalizing the output in the different localities,
it can run more nearly full time. Being acquainted with the entire
situation it can reduce the friction. A strong combination has
advantages in shipment. It can have a clearing-house for orders and
ship from the nearest source of supply. The least efficient factories
can be first closed when demand falls off. Factories can be
specialized to produce that for which each is best fitted. The
magnitude of the industry and its presence in different localities
strengthens its influence with the railroads. Its political as well as
its economic power is increased.”

Many of these economies of production are not new to these trusts, but    44
have been secured equally by large-scale manufacturing establishments.
Some of the savings, especially in buying raw material and marketing
their products, are peculiar to the trusts and mark a more efficient
mode of organization than mere concentration of industry in single
large establishments. Thus, it has been found possible to dispense
with a great number of traveling salesmen, of whom it was said that
30,000 lost their positions in the year 1898 alone. When the whisky
trust was formed only twelve of the eight distilleries entering into
the combination were kept running, but as these were the largest, best
located and best equipped, and were run at their full capacity, they
were able to turn out as much as all had done before and at an immense
economy. The saving of cross freights by having an order filled from
the plant most conveniently located is considerable; Mr. Gates
estimated the saving of the American Steel and Wire Company in this
single point at $500,000 a year. Such an economy could not be secured
by a single establishment, no matter how well organized or on how
large a scale. The specialization of particular factories to do
special processes is well illustrated by the organization of the
United States Steel Corporation.

The growth of this latter combination is an example not only of
consolidation, but of the integration of industry, that is, the
grouping together under one control of a whole series of industries.
From the mining of the ore and coal, through the processes of carrying
it to the furnaces, coking the coal and making the pig iron,
manufacturing the latter into the finished forms of iron and steel
products, and down to the marketing of the latter, every step is
carried on under the control of the United States Steel Corporation.
The assets of the company were stated as follows soon after its
organization, and illustrate the magnitude and scope of its operations:

  Iron and Bessemer ore properties          $ 700,000,000                 45
  Plants, mills, machinery, etc.              300,000,000
  Coal and coke fields                        100,000,000
  Railroads, ships, etc.                       80,000,000
  Blast furnaces                               48,000,000
  Natural gas fields                           20,000,000
  Limestone properties                          4,000,000
  Cash and cash assets                        148,251,000
                                           --------------
      Total                                $1,400,281,000

In addition to economies due to improvements in methods of
organization, production and marketing, another cause for the sudden
and vigorous outburst of trust promotion in the years 1898-1902 may be
found in the profits to be secured by promoters and organizers. After
the successful launching of the first few trusts, with their undoubted
economies and advantages, the movement was taken in hand by
professional promoters, who organized combinations, often with the
help of underwriters, in every branch of industry where there was any
promise of profit. That many of these were artificial or premature is
evident from the financial results: of the 183 industrial combinations
enumerated by the census in 1900, one-third paid no dividends whatever
after their formation and another one-third paid no dividends to the
holders of common stock. As an indication of the profits obtained by
the successful trust promoter may be cited the testimony given before
the Industrial Commission in the case of the Tin Plate Trust stating
that this promoter realized from $2,000,000 to $3,000,000 profit from
the undertaking. When to this is added the profit obtained by the
owners of the constituent plants, which were usually taken over by the
trust at an exorbitant valuation, it is clear that the stimulus of
financial gain was probably stronger in many cases than that of
economy in production. The bill was of course paid in most cases by
the investing public, which absorbed large amounts of industrials in
the years of their active promotion.

Other causes have sometimes been adduced to explain the growth of         46
combinations, such as the tariff and railroad freight discriminations,
but these are too local in their influence to explain adequately the
world-wide movement toward combination. Trusts exist in free-trade
England, and in Germany where freight discriminations on the
state-owned railroads are practically unknown. It is, however, true
that in the United States both these factors have been of decisive
importance in building up certain powerful trusts. “There can be no
doubt,” said the conservative report of the Industrial Commission,
“that in early times special favors from railroads were a prominent
factor, probably the most important factor, in building up some of the
largest combinations. The receipt of discriminating favors from
railroads has been conceded repeatedly by representatives of the
combinations themselves.” The Standard Oil, beef, coffee, steel, and
other trusts may be cited as illustrations. In the matter of the
tariff Mr. Havemeyer’s statement that “the mother of all trusts is the
customs tariff law” may be set down as the rather peevish utterance of
a disappointed beneficiary; but there is no doubt that combination has
been made easier behind the tariff wall. Instance the sugar trust
itself, the leather, steel, tin plate, and others.

Let us now turn to some of the effects of industrial combinations,
which we may classify according as they bear upon competitors and
producers of raw materials, labor, and consumers. As the number of
competitors is reduced the fierceness of competition among those
remaining in the field is greatly increased, for the value of the
prize to the successful enterprise is correspondingly greater. It is
not surprising therefore that at times this rivalry should have
assumed unethical if not actually illegal forms. The practice by some
trusts of fixing prices below cost at some strategic point in order to
crush out a troublesome competitor, and then correspondingly raising
them elsewhere so as not to sustain any loss, is serious because so       47
subtle. Prof. John B. Clark regards this as so serious an evil that he
would have the Constitution amended in order that power might be given
the Federal Government to prevent it. The producers of raw materials,
as cattlemen, crude oil and coal producers, sugar and tobacco growers,
and others, complain that the prices at which they sell their products
are dictated to them by the trusts, which are practically the sole
purchasers of what they have produced. They claim that prices are
depressed to the lowest point possible and that every gain from
increase of demand goes into the pockets of the trust managers. It may
of course be answered that the trust cannot depress prices below the
point at which a living profit can be secured by the producer of the
raw material or he will stop producing, but there is no doubt but that
the monopoly power possessed by the trust in such cases will sometimes
be used to the disadvantage of those whose product it alone buys.

The effects upon labor of the organization of capital in combined
industries and under centralized control are more complex. As trusts
have superseded single corporations because this mode of industrial
organization was more economical, we must expect to find that one of
the economies was the displacement of labor. The discharge of
traveling salesmen has already been spoken of; with the consolidation
of various plants under one control other high-priced men were let
go--managers, superintendents, etc. The same thing was true at the
other end of the industrial scale and thousands of workmen, usually
the least efficient and capable, were deprived of work. The natural
consequences of these combinations and economies were not clearly
apparent at the time, because they were happily coincident with a
period of business expansion and prosperity which reabsorbed into the
industrial organism most of the displaced workers. Another phase of
the relation between trusts and labor is that of their effect upon
wages.

In general it may be said that there are only two sources out of which    48
an increase of wages can be paid, and these are the profits of the
business organizer and manager or the increased product of the
business itself, and of these two only the latter can serve as a
permanent source of higher wages. Now it is pretty evident that labor
has not been in a position to force the trust magnates to forego their
profits. On the other hand, wages in industries carried on by
industrial combinations have risen, and it must therefore have been
because there was more produced and consequently more to be divided.
If the inefficient workers were discharged and only the best ones
retained by the trusts, here is one explanation why they could afford
to pay high wages--they paid more because they got more done. As yet
labor has not admitted that it is unable to cope with these industrial
combinations; it has however demanded that it be allowed to combine on
a national scale and to bargain collectively for united labor with
combined capital.

The discussion of the effects of trusts upon the consumer leads at
once to the discussion of their effects upon prices, for it is through
the agency of price that the trust touches the ordinary man. The
advantages claimed by trust organizers are economies of production and
lowered cost; but the vital question to the consumer is whether
lowered cost increases profits or reduces prices. On this point the
Industrial Commission reaches the following conclusion: “that in most
cases the combination has exerted an appreciable power over prices,
and in practically all cases it has increased the margin between raw
materials and finished products. Since there is reason to believe that
the cost of production over a period of years has lessened, the
conclusion is inevitable that the combinations have been able to
increase their profits.” Moreover the power over prices was greatest
during certain periods when the control of the combinations was
greatest. The problem therefore resolves itself into the question,        49
are trusts monopolies? While a categorical answer cannot be given to
this, it may safely be affirmed that all trusts try to be monopolies.
Nor is it necessary to control the production, sale, or purchase of a
commodity absolutely in order to exercise monopoly power; the control
of 50 or 60 per cent may suffice to secure virtual monopoly. The
purpose of a monopoly is so to fix the price that it will obtain the
maximum net profit. It is conceivable that this result may be attained
by lowering the monopoly price below the point of the competitive
price, but this is unusual. In general a monopoly price has meant a
high price, and a high price has meant a restriction of the output.
Where that has been the result of trust control, society has been
injured, for not only has it not shared in the economies of production
but it actually gets less and has to pay more than it would have done
under competition. It may be said, however, that even in the case of
the greatest monopoly there is always the specter of potential
competition threatening its profits, while the possibility of
substituting some other commodity for the monopolized article protects
the consumer from too great extortion and keeps the price within
limits. Absolute control over price is never exercised by any
monopoly. Nevertheless, we may fairly conclude, in the words of Henry
D. Lloyd, that “monopoly is business at the end of its journey,”
control over prices is the object of combination.

There remains to be considered another charge of monopoly which has
been brought against the trust, the monopoly of opportunity or the
suppression of individual initiative. It is no longer possible, it is
claimed, for the man of small means, even with good talents, to engage
in business for himself: he must accept some subordinate position in a
corporation where his individuality is checked and his power of
initiative does not find free play. So far as this is true it would
seem to be the result not so much of the trust movement as of             50
large-scale production. We have seen that the tendency of machine
production is to enlarge the business unit and to call for the
investment of constantly larger amounts of capital in up-to-date
establishments. Some writers even point out that the average business
man who engages in business on his own account fails, and that he
should therefore be grateful if more efficient producers offer him a
remunerative and steady salaried position. Without insisting upon this
point it may still fairly be noted that there are large fields of
enterprise that lie outside the area of monopolistic control.
“Large-scale production is best adapted to articles that can be turned
out in large quantities according to uniform patterns and standards;
individual initiative is still free in those lines of production that
call for artistic ability or appeal to individual tastes, or which,
like agriculture, are dependent upon variable conditions.”[6]

There are, however, other evils connected with trust organization and
management that are more easily remediable and that call for
legislative regulation. “The evils of combination, remedied by
regulative legislation,” concludes the report of the Industrial
Commission,[7] “come chiefly from two sources: (1) the more or less
complete exercise of the power of monopoly; (2) deception of the
public through secrecy or false information.” Various remedies have
been suggested to meet the first class of evils, those of monopoly,
generally in the direction of strengthening the powers of the Federal
Government. We have however no lack of legislation on this subject
already: thirty-four states and territories have passed anti-trust
laws, and the federal Anti-Trust Law of 1890 explicitly provides that
“every contract, combination in the form of a trust or otherwise, or
conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states,
or with foreign nations, is hereby declared illegal.” The severe          51
restrictive measures of the states have been largely nullified by the
loose legislation of three or four “charter granting” states, in which
95 per cent of all the trusts have accordingly been chartered, while
the federal enactments have been found very difficult to enforce. It
is not easy to define or to prove monopoly or conspiracy in restraint
of trade. The second class of evils has been met by statutes requiring
publicity and more definitely fixing the responsibility of corporation
officials. Such measures of control must be the first step toward
intelligent regulation, and are to be commended as thoroughly
reasonable. The establishment of the federal Bureau of Corporations
with power to “investigate” industrial corporations engaged in
interstate commerce has already led to the publication of some
valuable reports. We must first proceed along the lines of publicity
and intelligent information before we attempt more drastic remedies.




VI. SPECULATION AND CRISES.


An unavoidable element of risk enters into all modern business. In the
old handicraft stage of industry goods were made upon order; demand
preceded supply very definitely, and there was little possibility of
mistakes in production. Nowadays, as we have seen, production is for a
distant and often uncertain market. It is carried on by machine
methods and roundabout processes; sometimes the result is a very
remote one and the uncertainty of success is correspondingly great.
Production is not based upon order, but upon a forecast of the
possible demand, upon a future market. Chance and change are
inseparable from productive enterprise--natural chances from the
elements, political changes, as war or unfavorable legislation,
industrial mistakes or sickness or death of oneself or others, and
economic changes, as the invention of a new machine or a change in
fashion. These are the unavoidable incidents in industry and are not      52
under the control of the individual business. Some of them, however,
are so regularly recurrent that they can be foretold on a large scale
for any industrial society, and can be guarded against by insurance.
Everyone recognizes the desirability of having such risks as those of
fire, shipwreck, lightning, death, etc., assumed by certain
individuals or companies who make a business of such risk-taking. A
small premium is paid by the individual for protection, and he is
freed from anxiety from mischance and is able to devote his whole
energies and capital to his business; the insurance company has
specialized in this one department and by equalizing the chances over
a wide field has practically eliminated them. In doing this it
performs a service of recognized and undoubted social value.

There is another kind of risk-taking the social utility of which is
not at first sight so clear. Among the chances of productive
enterprise are those due to the rise and fall in the prices of the raw
materials, the labor, and the finished product between the time when
the process of production is begun and the time when it is completed.
Every farmer, every manufacturer, every student even who invests
capital in his own education, is to some extent a speculator. Along
certain lines he can protect himself by insurance, but that is not
possible in all. Is there no way, then, by which he can guard himself
against price fluctuations and assure himself of the legitimate gains
of his business? This, it may be answered, is the function of the
speculator in modern business, and in performing this service he is
benefiting society in much the same way that the insurance company
does. We must, however, clearly distinguish between legitimate and
illegitimate speculation; we are discussing only the former.

One way in which the speculative risk attaching to price fluctuations
is reduced for the manufacturer and assumed by the speculator is by
the establishment of a continuous open market, as the stock and           53
produce exchanges. If a miller, for instance, engages to deliver flour
a year hence and expects to begin milling in six months, he must know
at what price he can buy his wheat when he needs it, or his
anticipated gain may be turned into a loss by an unexpected rise in
the price of wheat. He is able, however, to buy a “future” in wheat on
the produce exchange from some broker who makes a specialty of this
business. He buys his needed wheat now for delivery six months hence,
and on the basis of this price is able to accept an order for his
flour a year from now, allowing himself a fair profit as a miller but
wholly eliminating the speculative risk of price fluctuations. Or a
building contractor, before making an estimate of the cost of erecting
a structure, will secure options at definite prices from dealers on
the materials he will require. So, too, in the iron and steel business
it is customary for manufacturers to contract in advance for materials
at the same time that they accept orders for the delivery of the
finished products. In all these cases the business of dealing in
futures is assumed by a particular class, who have developed a special
skill and ability in forecasting price variations, and who can do so
very accurately. It is not a matter of luck or chance, but the result
of wide knowledge and careful study. “To foretell the price of wheat
one must know the rainfall in India, the condition of the crop in
Argentina, must be in touch as nearly as possible with every unit of
supply that will come into the market.” Sometimes the speculators make
mistakes, but they are certainly less apt to do so than men who are
without their special talent and training.

The social value of this service lies in the equalization of demand
and supply between the present and future that is thereby effected.
Let us take as an illustration the case of the miller cited above. If
at the time he accepts the order for flour the price of wheat is high,
he will be inclined to charge a high price. But the wheat broker,
foreseeing that there is going to be an abundant crop six months          54
hence, engages to sell him his wheat for future delivery at a low
price, and he is thereby enabled to sell his flour at a lower price.
At the same time the price of the wheat on hand at the present time,
instead of being held and sold at famine prices, is consumed for
present needs at moderate prices. The operations of the wheat brokers
in such a case have a very steadying influence on prices, preventing
the oscillation between very high prices in times of scarcity and very
low prices in times of glut. It must be admitted that dealings in
futures are highly speculative; “but it must be remembered that it is
not merely the dealings in futures, but the future itself, that is
uncertain. If such dealings can be confined to the men most competent
to make accurate predictions, their tendency will clearly be to lessen
the uncertainties of business.”[8] But closely connected with
legitimate speculation or risk-taking by a specialized and trained
class, there is, as our stock and produce exchanges are actually
conducted, a large amount of illegitimate speculation, and to this we
may now turn for a brief consideration.

The facilities offered by the open markets on the exchanges and the
practice of dealing in futures are taken advantage of by many who,
without any special training or opportunities of knowing the market,
simply bet on the price movements. Brokers are willing to buy and sell
produce or stocks for their customers if the latter will put up with
them a margin of about 10 per cent to protect them from loss. It is
therefore possible for a person with little capital and no knowledge
to speculate on a margin, buying what he does not want and selling
what he does not own. In practice it is impossible to distinguish
between those dealings in which actual delivery is intended
(legitimate speculation) and those in which no such delivery is
contemplated (gambling), and consequently most efforts to regulate        55
transactions on the exchanges have failed to accomplish their purpose.
The purification of their methods would seem to lie with the members
of such exchanges themselves. The contention has often been made that
these fictitious transactions in such commodities as wheat or corn or
cotton create an artificial reduction in prices, since the
professional gambler usually sells short or “bears” the market, and
that this injuriously affects the farmer. This is manifestly
untenable, since every fictitious sale must be balanced by a
fictitious purchase. What actually takes place is simply a bet between
the two parties to such a transaction on the actual course of prices
and of itself does not affect prices, except in the unusual case of a
“corner.” There is, however, great possibility of evil in the presence
of a crowd of uninformed speculators, for they can greatly increase
the power of an unscrupulous operator who can persuade them to follow
his lead. Their presence, too, increases the temptation to such a man
to rig the market. Under present conditions the abuses of speculation
are more in evidence than the economic advantages. How to confine
speculation to the small group of risk-takers who have special
training and aptitude for it, and to prevent gambling on the stock and
produce exchanges is one of the economic problems of the day.

One of the most striking phenomena of modern industry is the frequent
and violent convulsions of business known as crises. They are
characteristic of all commercially advanced countries and are
generally most marked in those countries which are most advanced. They
are a product of modern methods of capitalistic production and are
essentially a phenomenon of the nineteenth century. A crisis in its
last analysis is the result of a lack of adjustment between production
and consumption, due primarily to mistakes in production. It is
significant that crises usually occur in periods of business
prosperity when credit is easy, prices high, and employment general.      56
Such a period of business prosperity and rising credit may have been
begun by a series of good harvests. The demand for manufactured
commodities increases, prices rise, manufacturers enlarge their
factories or engage in new enterprises, wages and profits go up. Many
speculators, seeing the rise, and thinking it will continue, borrow
money to buy goods with the expectation of selling again at a profit.
Credit operations are expanded to a dangerous extent, and when at last
a shock to confidence occurs the house of cards collapses and a
painful liquidation and readjustment of industry ensues. The state of
trade, in the words of Lord Overstone, “revolves apparently in an
established cycle. First we find it in a state of quiescence--next
improvement, growing confidence, prosperity, excitement, over-trading,
convulsion, pressure, stagnation, distress, ending again in
quiescence.”

The immediate occasion of a crisis is always a shock to credit or
confidence. Such a shock, begun perhaps by the failure of a bank or
merchant, creates a demand for ready money. No one is sure that his
neighbor will remain solvent. Everyone accordingly tries to secure
himself against loss by enlarging his cash reserve and thus lessens
the supply for others. Now modern industry is carried on by means of
credit. There is at no one time enough money in the country to meet
all obligations expressed in terms of money. Considerably over
three-fourths of the larger commercial transactions in the United
States are carried on by means of credit. If everyone tries at the
same time to get actual cash, there is simply not enough money in the
country to go around. This increase of demand and diminution in the
supply of money forces up the interest rate on short-time loans.
Money--actual cash--is needed by many people to meet immediate
engagements and they are willing to pay almost any price for it. In
the last panic the rates for call money went up to over 100 per cent      57
and in many cities in the United States clearing-house certificates
and other substitutes for money were issued for use in ordinary retail
trade. But even at high rates money can often not be borrowed. Many
merchants and manufacturers are compelled to sell their goods at a
sacrifice in order to obtain it. Vast quantities of goods and
securities are thrown on the market just when investors and consumers
feel least able to purchase. The result is a fall in prices. Such a
fall in prices lowers profits. Enterprises have been started and
engagements made on the supposition that prices would continue at the
old high level. When they fall it is impossible to pay interest out of
current earnings. Foreclosures and readjustments take place. There is
a general liquidation and reorganization of industry. When interest
contracts have been adjusted, then the effect on wages begins to be
felt. As long as a manufacturer is struggling to maintain his credit
he will keep his factory going, but when he has failed and perhaps
been foreclosed, then the factory stops. Men are thrown out of work,
and wages--the price of labor--fall. Labor troubles usually mark the
end of such a period of readjustment.

This stage marks the end of the crisis and the beginning of a period
of depression or “hard times,” which continues for a longer or shorter
period. The panic of 1893 was followed by a long-continued depression
which lasted until 1897, a period which was marked by low prices and
slack work. In 1898 began a revival of business and an era of marked
prosperity set in which continued for almost ten years, interrupted
only slightly by a “Wall Street panic” in 1903. In October, 1907, a
severe crisis occurred, recovery from which, however, has been
remarkably rapid. The periodicity which has attended crises in the
past is so marked--occurring as they have at intervals of about ten
years--that many writers consider them inevitable. As the easiest way
to answer this question we may take up three main theories as to the      58
causes of crises.

A much quoted, but now generally discredited, theory is that of W. S.
Jevons, a noted English economist, who ascribed crises to sun-spots.
Every ten years and a fraction there occur outbursts of electrical and
heat energy on the sun, which we call sun-spots. These result in
increased heat waves, which affect the crops on the earth, causing
enlarged harvests in Europe and the United States and drought and
famine in India and the tropics. The large harvests and good prices
start a wave of prosperity and speculation, which culminates
inevitably in a panic and depression, until a recurrence of the heat
phenomenon starts the cycle again. The theory states some undoubted
facts, but no causal connection between sun-spots and crises can be
traced, as the latter are too irregular and the two do not always
coincide. Were this theory true crises would be beyond human control.

A second theory, or group of theories, are those which attribute
crises to over-production. Under modern conditions of industry a small
group of men direct industry and determine what shall be produced.
They try to estimate future demand and to adjust production to
consumption, but they often make mistakes. They divert capital into
unproductive industries, they produce the wrong things and create a
comparative glut in certain lines, and when they cannot sell their
goods at a profitable price they fail and precipitate a crisis.
Industry must then be reorganized and frequently control be put in the
hands of other men. A variation has been given this theory by the
socialists, under the leadership of Rodbertus, who insist that the
reason that there is over-production is because of the institution of
private property. Since the capitalists own all the tools of
production they pay the laborers only starvation wages. The latter
cannot possibly buy all that is produced and commodities consequently
heap up in the warehouses until they are thrown upon the market to be
sold at any price. Then a panic occurs and a readjustment of production.  59

The last of these theories regards a crisis as essentially due to a
failure of credit. It is seen that a large part of modern industry is
carried on by borrowed capital, by roundabout processes and for a
distant market and not upon order. That is, the success of a business
depends upon its ability to sell its goods when produced. Now the
aggregate volume of transactions that can be carried on in a year, so
runs the theory, depends upon the efficiency of the credit system;
that is, in general, upon the freedom with which banks are willing to
loan money to people who engage to repay it in the future out of their
ventures. If for any reason the banks reduce this accommodation the
amount of business that can be transacted upon borrowed capital is
lessened. Either some transactions must stop or prices must fall.
Either of these events causes commercial disaster. The contraction of
credit makes it impossible to get the goods into the right hands, and
so we have the phenomena of over-production in a great many lines. As
exchange and transportation have developed and markets widened, crises
have become more universal. According to this theory, they are
inseparably connected with the use of credit and can be controlled
only by a more careful granting of credit by the banks to industrial
managers. Another phase of the credit theory is presented by those who
insist that the cause of crises is the rhythmic overestimation of the
profits to be secured out of certain lines of production, or their
over-capitalization. The new enterprises are financed by the banks on
the basis of this mistaken over-capitalization, their organizers
engage to pay rates of interest which they cannot earn, and the crash
inevitably follows. This is often called the over-capitalization
theory, and is essentially psychological in its character.

There is no doubt as to the truth contained in this last theory. It
helps to explain the rhythmic periodicity of crises. After every          60
period of business depression confidence revives and hope is renewed;
overestimation of the success of new ventures is inevitable. Then
follows a mistaken investment of capital in certain lines of
production, as in railroads in 1884, and a relative over-production at
profitable prices of certain commodities. The true explanation seems
to be found in a combination of the over-production and
over-capitalization theories.

The practical problem that presents itself in this connection is the
question as to whether it is possible to prevent the recurrence of
crises. In view of the explanation just given it would seem that they
must be regarded as unpreventable as long as industry is carried on
under the competitive capitalistic system of production and the modern
credit system. Moreover, crops differ in amount from year to year and
probably always will. Human production and human genius are unequal.
Crises may be regarded as the price a progressive society pays for its
advance, and they may be expected to recur pretty regularly at
periodic intervals. Their disastrous effects may, however, be greatly
lessened by wise currency legislation, by greater care in granting
credit, and by greater wisdom in the direction of individual effort.




VII. THE MODERN WAGE SYSTEM.


We have already characterized the modern system of industry as
capitalistic, that is, as involving the use of expensive and complex
machinery in factories under the control of the capitalist managers of
industry. As we have seen, such a system has caused an enormous
increase in the production of wealth; it has also raised the general
standard of comfort and the level of wages, and has relieved labor to
a considerable extent of the deadly strain of hard manual toil that
was characteristic of preceding systems. The factory system, under
which capitalistic production is now carried on, may also fairly be
credited with other beneficial results: as steadiness and punctuality     61
are essential, it has on the whole led to increased sobriety and
temperance; the work in general is healthier, being performed under
better sanitary conditions than under the old domestic system; the
intellectual status of the workingman has been raised, as vastly more
intelligence is required of a skilled machine operator than of the
old-time hand laborer; and finally the general well-being of the
working class has been improved, as they have shared in the larger
production made possible by machine methods. But, on the other hand,
the new processes and methods have been accompanied by great abuses,
though never so great in this country as in England. Long hours, the
employment of women and children, the weakened economic position of
the laborer, fluctuations in production, liability to be without
employment, industrial accidents, the abolition of personal ties
between employer and employe, the crowding of workmen into a small
space to work by day and their concentration in city tenements by
night--these are some of the problems for which the factory system
must be held responsible. The condition and position of labor have
been vitally affected. So far we have considered mainly the problems
connected with the organization and use of capital. We must now take
up the various questions connected with the relation of labor to
capital and to the capitalistic system of production.

One of the most vital factors in the situation--which we must frankly
admit at the start--is the existence in modern industrial society of a
distinct wage-earning class. It is perfectly obvious that under
present conditions of production great capital or great ability is
necessary in order to become the manager of an industrial enterprise.
Most laborers do not possess either the one or the other of these, and
although there are fortunate examples of industrial leaders who have
risen from the ranks, the general rule is, once a wage-earner always a
wage-earner. The number of those who can achieve industrial               62
independence is moreover growing smaller as business becomes more
specialized and centralized. The laborer therefore belongs to a class,
which is rapidly developing what the German socialists call
class-consciousness, that is, the feeling that he belongs to a
distinct industrial group with interests different from and often
antagonistic to those of other groups or classes. In his struggles
with employers over wages this antagonism of immediate aims obscures
the deeper mutuality and interdependence of their really complementary
interests and not infrequently leads to a feeling of hostility,
finding expression in strikes and labor agitation.

In the transition to the factory system Mr. John A. Hobson[9] points
out that the position of the laborer has been one of increasing
dependence in the following five important points: (1) The ownership
of material--at first the worker owned this and made it into the
finished product, but now he has only a passing interest in a small
part of the process of working it up. (2) Ownership of tools--he
retained these up to the time of the introduction of machinery, but
now seldom owns them. (3) Control of productive power--with the
displacement of hand labor and muscular power by steam-driven
machinery, he no longer owns even this. (4) Relations between workers
and employers--they were formerly on an equality; under the guild
system the master and the apprentice had the same social position; now
the laborer has sunk in the scale, or the employer has risen, until
the only bond between them is, as Carlyle said, the “cash nexus.” A
case was recently instanced where a workingman who had been working in
a factory met his employer for the first time at the end of seventeen
years. (5) Workplace--until the establishment of the factory system
this had always been the home; now it is the factory, and there is a      63
complete divorcement between work and the home.

Another characteristic of modern industry from the labor point of view
is the existence not merely of a wage-earning class, but, more
fundamental, of the wage system. “It is characteristic of the modern
industrial system,” writes President Hadley,[10] “that a laborer who
owns no capital, though nominally free to do what he pleases, must
actually find some property owner who will give him enough to keep him
alive during the period which must elapse between the rendering of the
labor and the sale of the finished product. Under such circumstances,
the laborer almost inevitably submits to the direction of the property
owner in deciding how his labor shall be applied. Laborers without
capital must necessarily work on this basis; even those who have small
amounts of capital habitually do so. Such advances of capital are
known as wages.” Here we have the essence of the wage system in a nut
shell. The laborer sells his labor to an employer for a stipulated
wage. He has a commodity, his labor, consisting of a certain amount of
strength and skill, which he is free to dispose of on the market to
the best advantage, as the owner of any other commodity might do.
Legally, labor is property. Owing, however, to the fact that all
modern production requires capital, the only buyer of his labor is a
capitalist, who directs the way in which the labor shall be applied.
Such a condition, as well as some peculiarities of the commodity labor
leave the laborer, indeed, only “nominally” free. In theory the labor
contract is a perfectly free contract, entered into voluntarily by
both employer and wage-earner, and the courts have generally insisted
that this theoretical freedom must be maintained. In practice various
modifications of the theory have taken place: legislation has been
passed protecting laborers from bargaining away their rights, and         64
trade unions have been formed to bargain collectively for a group of
laborers. In the last analysis, however, the laborer must support
himself by the sale of his labor; society guarantees him neither a
living nor even the right to work. He is a bargainer in a competitive
industrial world and he must assume the responsibility of providing
for himself and his family by securing work. Just what is involved in
such a statement is perhaps best brought out by comparing the modern
wage system with previous systems of labor.

The first historical system of labor, aside from that in the family,
was that of slaves. In this case the labor was forced, and being given
under coercion was probably very inefficient; but the laborer was at
least assured of a minimum of food, clothes and shelter. Slavery was
the main source of manual labor in the ancient world, and did not
disappear in England until the eleventh century. The feudal system of
the Middle Ages was characterized by serfdom, according to which the
laborer was bound to the soil and was compelled to render his lord
certain services. Gradually serfdom was broken down and the wage
system took its place, although remnants of serfdom remained in
England until the eighteenth century. Four centuries before this,
however, the disintegration of the feudal society had already begun,
the serfdom of the agricultural laborer was commuted into regular
money payments, and the artisan bought or otherwise secured his
freedom from feudal exactions. In the towns industry was regulated by
the guilds, and while at first they were distinctly beneficial, in
time they became monopolistic and oppressive. Power was lodged in the
hands of the wealthy traders and merchants and they legislated in
their own behalf against the growing class of laborers, as did the
wealthy land owners against the agricultural laborers. The Statute of
Laborers and other acts sought to fix wages and to prevent the freedom
of the laborer in moving about or choosing his own occupation. Not        65
indeed until the nineteenth century were the last of these old
regulative laws repealed and the modern labor contract recognized in
law and practice as a free contract. “The growth of labor,” says
Brentano, has been “from the system of authority to the system of
contract.” The system of authority, by which rates of wages, length of
apprenticeship, and other details of industry were fixed by some
superior authority, was found to be restrictive, uneconomic and
unjust, and it gave way to the principle of economic freedom.
According to the newer theory, first given effective voice by Adam
Smith, in 1776, the individual should be left to himself, as he knows
his own interest better than does the most enlightened government. The
freest scope was given to the powers of individuals and each was to be
the unlimited master of himself and his possessions.

It has since been found necessary, however, to modify both the theory
and practice of this extreme individualism in order to protect the
interests of various classes of society, especially the laborer. The
legal theory still is that “today the labor contract is perfectly
free: either side may make whatever contract he can get the other side
to sign. Not only this, but either side may freely combine to demand
any form of contract from the other side, as mere combinations alone
are now made perfectly legal.”[11] In practice, however, this complete
freedom has been greatly modified by factory acts, acts restricting
the hours and conditions of employment of women and children,
anti-truck acts, laws providing for weekly payments, guarding of
machinery, limiting the hours of labor, and on the other hand
prohibiting intimidation and molesting. For the most part these laws
have applied to women and children, who are thought less capable of
guarding their own interests, and to a much less degree to labor          66
contracts made by men, who have been considered better able to make
equal contracts with employers. But concerning certain conditions of
employment it has been realized that even adult males are not capable
of securing equitable bargains, and along these lines the nominal
freedom of the labor contract has been decidedly abridged. The
attitude of the courts toward such legislation shows that they have
declared many laws unconstitutional on the ground that they infringe
upon the right of free contract, but in the long run seem inclined to
uphold as much of this restrictive legislation as seems necessary to
obviate the undoubtedly evil results that flow from this real
inequality of employer and laborer.

It is a very vital and important practical economic problem that
presents itself in this connection. How far shall we carry this
regulative principle, or how far shall we insist upon the principle of
freedom? Many labor leaders are again asking for an effectual control
of the labor contract, not by the action of trade unions, but by the
direct legislation of the state. What shall be our attitude to this
demand? Before we can fairly answer this question we must consider
somewhat more fully the character of the bargain that takes place
between an employer and an individual workman, and the nature of the
commodity that the laborer has to sell.

It has already been stated that the commodity which the laborer brings
upon the market is his labor, that is, himself, his time, and his
energies. But these wares are peculiar and differ in several important
respects from ordinary marketable commodities. In the first place,
labor is like a perishable commodity which must be sold at once if the
owner is not to incur loss. The laborer has usually little if any
capital by which to support himself in case he cannot find work, and
may be compelled to make a forced sale of his labor, that is, to
accept unduly low wages. In this respect then he is at a disadvantage     67
in bargaining with his employer. A second peculiarity of the sale of
labor is that the laborer and his work are inseparable. The seller of
an ordinary commodity disposes of it absolutely when he makes a sale.
“It matters nothing to the seller of bricks whether they are to be
used in building a palace or a sewer; but it matters a great deal to
the seller of labor, who undertakes to perform a task of given
difficulty, whether or not the place in which it is to be done is a
wholesome and a pleasant one, or whether or not his associates will be
such as he cares to have.” The person who buys this labor necessarily
directs the application of it to the task in hand, and thus controls
very largely the place, the sanitary and social conditions, the hours,
the character, and safety of the work. In the third place, the
superior knowledge and intelligence of the employers gives them an
advantage in bargaining with their employes, while the reluctance of
employers to “spoil the labor market” often prevents that freedom of
competition which is supposed to secure to the laborer his full share
of the product he helps to produce.

In view of these facts we may fairly conclude that workmen are
inferior to employers as bargainers and that protective legislation is
necessary in order to put them on a real equality. “When laborers have
to make a forced sale of their labor, their freedom of contract is
more nominal than real. When women and children stand individually
before the manager of hundreds of thousands of capital, it is possible
that there may be little freedom and less equality in the contract by
which they sell their services.”[12] It is clear that between two
parties of such unequal knowledge, resources and ability as a laborer
and his employer the labor contract cannot be entirely free and equal.
While trade unions, by combining isolated workmen into formidable
and unified groups, have immeasurably increased their bargaining          68
strength, yet legislation has also been found necessary to remedy the
disadvantages already enumerated. It is realized that “there is no
greater inequality than the equal treatment of unequals.” In the
opening section of this text attention was called to the fact that
economic freedom or liberty was one of the corner stones of our modern
industrial society. But freedom can best be secured by securing
equality and responsibility. Factory legislation and labor laws are
designed to correct the inequalities imposed by nature or involved in
the very nature of capitalistic production. Direct interference by the
state in the freedom of contract is justified as leading to a more
real and certain equality and liberty. But while we may thoroughly
approve the principle of labor legislation it is difficult to know at
what point we should stop. A leading American authority on the law of
labor has stated[13] that “the industrial laborer at least is
beginning to be a privileged class in the law.” On the other hand, it
was possible for Disraeli to say as late as 1875, after the passage of
the Employers and Workmen Act by the British Parliament, “for the
first time in the history of this country employer and employed sit
under equal laws”--so recently were the legal disabilities removed
under which the English workmen had suffered up to this time.[14] The
pendulum has swung so rapidly and so far in labor’s direction in the
last generation that it is a fair question how far it will--or
should--continue to go.




VIII. LABOR ORGANIZATIONS AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.


As modern capitalistic production caused the growth of a distinct
wage-earning class and brought about a sharp separation between
employers and laborers, and as the latter were thrown upon their own      69
resources under the prevailing theories of free competition and free
contract, it was inevitable that they should organize to secure their
interests as a class. The growth of labor organizations has been
greatest in those countries where the laborer has been forced to
depend mostly upon his own efforts for protection and improvement,
namely, in England and the United States. On the continent of Europe,
on the other hand, where the individual has been accustomed to look to
the government for the redress of industrial grievances, there has
been a much less vigorous and spontaneous development of such
organizations. They are a product of the nineteenth century and had
their origin in modern machine production.

The growth of labor organizations in the United States has proceeded
hand in hand with the industrial development of this country, and has
been especially rapid since the Civil War. Two distinct types of trade
unions may be noted--the local and the national (or international)
unions. The former, which comprises members who live and work in the
same locality, is the primary unit, and dates back to the beginning of
the century. Each local union, even when subordinate to a national
organization, is a self-governing unit, and is absolutely democratic.
Its relation to the national body has been well compared to that of
one of our states to the United States. The first national union was
not formed until 1850, but now these far surpass the locals in
importance. Their government is representative, as they are made up of
local unions. The great majority of the national trade unions are
bound together in the powerful federal organization, the American
Federation of Labor. The membership of this body numbers considerably
over 1,000,000, while the railroad unions, which are not connected
with it, claim about 125,000 more. Probably not far from 1,500,000
persons in the United States belong to labor organizations, which is
about 10 per cent of the total working population or about 15 per         70
cent of those engaged in trade and transportation, manufacturing and
mechanical pursuits. While this does not seem a very large proportion
and is not as large as the membership of British trade unions, yet it
must be remembered that they constitute on the whole the elite of the
labor world and exercise an authority and power out of proportion to
their numbers. Many other workmen, who do not themselves belong to the
unions, follow their lead and are directly affected by their actions.

Historically the two most important national organizations in this
country have been the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of
Labor, and they represent such different principles that it will be
worth while to describe them. The Knights of Labor was organized in
1869 as a local union of seven garment cutters and had a meteoric
career, counting a membership of 730,000 in 1886, the year of its
greatest strength. It was a national amalgamation of mixed local
assemblies composed of workers of all trades who lived in the same
locality. It held the theory that the interests of all members of the
laboring class are identical and must be cared for at the same time,
if possible, by political action, by co-operation, and by education.
In 1886, however, it entered upon a series of disastrous strikes;
later it came into conflict with trade unions which had not joined its
ranks and were opposed to its policies; and finally it became
entangled in politics. As it lost in influence and strength its place
was taken by the American Federation of Labor, which was its very
opposite in organization and government. This latter body is a
“confederation of trade and labor unions,” each trade being organized
separately into local unions which are given great autonomy, these
unions alone being represented in the national body. Only matters of
general interest come before it, all local trade matters being left to
the local unions. In 1903 it claimed a membership of 1,745,000.

More important than the history of labor organizations is a knowledge     71
of their objects and methods. The primary purpose is of course to
control the conditions of labor and to substitute the principle of
collective bargaining for individual contract. As one of the most
effective ways to secure this result they aim at a more or less
complete monopoly of the labor market. This they may do by bringing
all workers in a trade within the union or by preventing non-union men
from working. The first of these is called the inclusive method,[15]
and if successful makes the union the sole seller of the kind of labor
controlled by its members. It is a monopoly of the laborers against
the employers and is sought to be enforced by inducing men to join the
union either by persuasion or coercion, the latter finding expression
in the strikes against the employment of non-union men and the
insistence upon the “closed shop.” The other form of monopoly consists
in the exclusion of new members from the trade and in a control of
employment; this is a monopoly of a small group against their
fellow-workmen. It is enforced by regulating the entrance to the
trade, making it difficult or expensive, or by limiting the number of
apprentices. Sometimes, as in the Chicago Building Trades in 1900,
they have united with their employers by means of “exclusive
agreements” to raise wages and prices of the finished products at the
same time, and thus jointly to mulct the public. Such efforts to
monopolize the labor market have their counterparts in the
organization of capital, as we have seen. In practice such a labor
monopoly has sometimes been used to improve and elevate conditions,
just as sometimes a capitalistic monopoly has reduced prices below the
competitive point. In general, however, we must condemn monopoly on
principle in the competitive field and insist that freedom and
opportunity be given to all on as equal terms as possible. Of the two     72
forms of trade union monopoly, the former alone, which endeavors to
make it all comprehensive and to enforce generally union conditions,
can be economically justified.

“The establishment of a standard rate of wages may perhaps be said to
be the primary object of trade union policy. Without the standard rate
the trade union, such as it is, could have no existence.”[16] The
purpose of the union is to substitute collective bargaining for
individual agreements and thereby to improve the condition of its
members. But if a single bargain is to determine the pay of a large
number of men, there must be a common standard. In every employment on
a large scale the men are necessarily grouped together and their pay
is determined by a common rule. This is true even in non-union shops.
It is generally assumed that the standard rate of labor organizations
means a uniform wage for each member, but this is not the case; it
means rather a uniform rate of pay to all for the same performance. In
the case of piece work, it could manifestly not mean anything else;
but a large number of labor leaders object to piece work. They insist
that a standard wage means a minimum wage, and that by the
establishment of such a minimum the whole standard of efficiency and
the plane of competition are raised, as the employers cannot then
afford to hire any but competent workmen. The question immediately
presents itself as to what is to become of the older or partially
disabled men, who are no longer able to earn the standard or minimum
wage? In England they are practically guaranteed a subsistence by the
union; in this country the union not infrequently exempts them from
the provisions as to the standard wage. When the rule is enforced
there is certainly a real hardship for these men. But from the
employers there comes the more serious complaint that the effect of       73
the standard wage is to reduce to a dead level the efficient and the
inefficient; that it is a maximum wage and that the efficient and
industrious are prevented from earning more than a fixed amount. There
is undoubtedly a great deal of truth in this charge; the man who
hastens the pace is said to be taking “blood money,” and sometimes a
maximum wage is set which the members are forbidden to exceed. On the
other hand, it may fairly be said that while the union regulation of
wages does tend to produce greater uniformity, the union rate is
usually higher than the competitive rate would be, that is, wages are
leveled up, not down; and finally, that territorial variations make
the local rate conform to local conditions.

A reduction in the hours of labor has been even more strenuously urged
by progressive labor leaders in the United States than an increase in
wages. “Organize and control your trade and shorten your hours,” is
their contention, “and wages will take care of themselves.” Their
arguments in favor of a general shortening of the working day are
twofold. In the first place, owing to the intensity and strain of work
under modern machine methods, the worker cannot work efficiently more
than eight or nine hours a day. The work is too exacting and the
strain on the attention too great; it is a noticeable fact that most
of the accidents in industrial establishments occur in the last hour
or two of the working day. Not only that, but the laborer is entitled
to his share of industrial progress in the form of more leisure,
giving him time for a better family and social life, affording
opportunity for intellectual improvement, and permitting the
development of more rational and higher wants. With the improvement in
the condition of the laboring classes, will go the elevation of
society as a whole.

The second argument in favor of shorter hours put forward by the trade
unionist, is economic rather than social. He argues that a “reduction     74
of hours will diminish the supply of labor in the market, and so will
raise its price. It will make room for the unemployed, and so will
remove the depressing influence of their competition.” There is
involved in this contention the familiar lump-of-labor argument of the
trade unionist: there is just so much work to be done, and if some men
do each a little less there will be more for others. By shortening the
hours of labor of everybody employment will be made more general, and
the work will be better distributed. Now the economists in general
have supported the trade unions in their demands for a shorter working
day, but they have done so because they believed that the product of
industry would not thereby be diminished. They have seen that when the
hours of labor were reduced the laborer was less rapidly worn out
physically, that he could work more rapidly for a short time, and that
his increased leisure and pay, if rationally used, made him a more
intelligent and efficient worker. In other words, a reduction in the
hours of labor from 15 a day to 12, to 10, and even in some cases to
8, was not attended by a parallel reduction in the output, but the
latter remained about the same. This is the great economic
justification of the shorter working day, and as long as this can go
on without materially affecting the product of industry it must be
approved. If, however, the latter is decreased there will be less to
divide and then the relative disadvantages of a smaller dividend must
be weighed against the advantages of increased leisure. Of course the
point to which the number of hours can be reduced without lessening
the product can only be determined by experiment, and will differ in
different trades, but it is inevitable that until this point is
reached the pressure of the trade unions for shorter working days--or
for more holidays or half-holidays--will not be successfully resisted.

Turning now from theory to fact, we find that there has been a great      75
improvement in the condition of labor in this respect. At the
beginning of the nineteenth century the almost universal working day
was, as McMaster tells us, from sun to sun. As factories grew up the
habits of agricultural labor were carried over into industrial
occupations, and working days of 16 and 18 hours were not uncommon. In
1903 the average length of the working day in the United States was
9.6 hours. This great reform may fairly be credited to the efforts of
organized labor itself, for without their insistence and struggles it
is unlikely that it would have been voluntarily granted by employers.

The limitation of output results almost necessarily from the
above-mentioned practices of the unions: reduction of hours,
prohibition of piece work, and the standardization of wages all tend
to restrict the output of the individual worker. But some of the
unions have gone further and have directly limited the amount that
could be produced during a given period by the laborer. This has been
particularly true of British unions and is the subject of common
complaint by English employers and writers, but illustrations may
easily be found in the United States. Thus in Chicago in 1900 “the
lathers limited a day’s work to twenty-five bundles of lath, for which
they received $3; they had formerly done thirty-five bundles for a
daily wage of $1.75. Plasterers were limited to thirty square yards a
day; the steam fitters were permitted to lay only ninety feet of steam
pipe per day; but the plumbers had the most objectionable rules and
restricted materially the amount of work that could be done in a
day.”[17] These rules were defended by the unions on the ground that
they were necessary in order to secure careful work and to prevent the
“rusher” for setting the pace for a fair day’s work. The practice         76
has not been uncommon, especially in the sweated trades, for an
unscrupulous employer to pay a few particularly able workmen to put
extra speed into their work and so set a pace that the other workmen
would be compelled to maintain. This was especially objected to by the
unions in the case of team work. They claimed that when all the
workmen had come up to the new standard, particularly in piece work,
the wages were reduced so that even by working at the higher rate of
speed, they could only make a fair wage. One of the rules of the
Chicago carpenters’ union provided that “any member guilty of
excessive work or rushing on any job shall be reported and shall be
subject to a fine of $5.” Whatever the excuse it is clear that such
limitations cannot be economically justified. Not only does such
dawdling undermine the industrial efficiency of the worker, but it is
unfair to the employer. If the latter bargains for the union rate of
wages and the normal working day, he is entitled to a full return of
the laborer’s best efforts. Otherwise there is no fairness in
collective bargaining. “So far as labor leaders are concerned,” said
Mr. John Burns, the English trade unionist, “we are all strongly
opposed to the restriction of production; we are all in favor of
better and more conscientious work.”

Laboring men have never been quite able to divest themselves of their
old antipathy to labor-saving machinery. They generally regard the
introduction of a new machine as a displacer of men, a creator of
unemployment, a depresser of wages. Some unions have successfully
resisted the introduction of machinery into their trades, as the stone
cutters in Chicago,[18] but in general they have recognized the
impossibility of this attitude. In general they now demand that when
machinery is introduced it shall be operated by union men and their
wages shall be fixed so as to give the workers a share of the             77
increased production.

The policies and methods of the trade unions thus far discussed are
those of a militant nature, but the fraternal objects of these
associations, though less conspicuous, are none the less important.
Labor organizations generally; have insurance and benefit features, by
which sick, injured, or unemployed members are assisted. This is
particularly true of the English organizations, which developed these
features before the rise of the militant new unionism. They often
possess large funds and have been rendered thereby more conservative
and responsible. The educative effect of trade unionism among the
members is marked; some of them possess libraries and all of them
promote discussion and thought upon economic problems, while the
administration of their affairs often gives valuable training. The
older unions did much to encourage co-operation among their members,
but today the tendency is to limit their activities to the essential
one for which they are organized, namely, collective bargaining.

Intelligent unionists realize that they can secure the various objects
for which they strive only by substituting collective bargaining for
contracts between employers and individual laborers. Where this plan
is accepted by employers, representatives of the two sides agree upon
wage scales, usually for a year; during this period the chief task of
union officials is to see that the agreement is lived up to, and if
possible to add to their membership and strengthen the union. In the
United States relatively few trades have adopted this method as a
general practice, the employers still being able to dictate wages and
conditions of employment in most of them, while the unions are still
struggling for recognition, if not for existence. Employers insist, in
refusing to make collective bargains with the unions, that, as they
run all the risks, they must be permitted to manage their business as
they see fit and without interference from the business agent of the      78
union. In reply the unions insist that hours, wages, and conditions of
employment are as much their business as that of the employer. The
latter also urges that the trade unions as at present organized are
too irresponsible and before they ask for collective bargaining should
be incorporated, so that they could be sued for breach of contract if
guilty of such. As yet, however, the unions have preferred their
present position of irresponsibility and immunity and have almost
invariably refused to be incorporated.

“In the minds of a large section of the public,” writes President
Hadley,[19] “labor unions are chiefly associated with strikes. It is
believed by many who ought to know better, that such organizations
exist for the purpose of striking, and that if the organizations were
suppressed, industrial peace would be secured. The first of these
ideas is a distorted one; the second is wholly unfounded.” Strikes
are, however, a necessary concomitant of collective bargaining. If the
representatives of a union cannot come to terms with an employer, they
may compel their members to refuse to sell their commodity, labor;
such a concerted refusal to work is a strike. The “right to quit work”
has been regarded as a sacred one by trade unionists, but it involves
social consequences of great importance. For the workingman, it means
loss of wages and demoralizing idleness; to the employer, idle
capital, loss of profits, and depreciation of plant; and to the
consuming public, inconvenience and annoyance together with curtailed
production. Quite aside from all acts of violence and lawlessness, by
which they are too often accompanied, there is involved an enormous
money waste. According to a report of the Department of Labor, losses
from strikes and lockouts in the United States from 1881 to 1900
amounted to $449,342,000 or an average loss per establishment involved
of about $3,500.

The public is awakening to the realization that it suffers the            79
greatest injury as the innocent third party to every industrial
dispute, and is insisting that the industrial peace be kept or more
reasonable methods of settling differences be found than a strike or
lockout. Such a method is found in conciliation and arbitration. In
the older and more strongly organized unions strikes are infrequent
and methods of joint discussion and agreement are increasingly
resorted to. Boards of conciliation are often provided for, which
endeavor by means of conference and concession to prevent a dispute
from arising; they succeed best where both employers and employes are
organized. Should the dispute come to a head, however, provision is
usually made for its reference to a board of arbitration, which may be
selected by the disputants themselves or may be created by the state;
in the latter case the acceptance of the award may be voluntary or
compulsory. In the United States most of the successful boards have
been those selected by the parties to the dispute; the state boards
have usually the power only of investigating the causes of the
trouble, but this in itself has proved of considerable value in more
than one instance, notably in the case of the Anthracite Coal
Commission. Compulsory arbitration is being given a thorough trial in
Australasia and seems to be meeting with success there. In this
country, however, the trade unions are strongly opposed to compulsory
or enforced governmental arbitration. Writing of Great Britain, Mr.
and Mrs. Webb assert that the principle of arbitration, having been
found inconsistent with collective bargaining, is fast going out of
favor. It would seem from the experience of both England and the
United States that the chief virtue in these methods lies in the habit
of joint conference and conciliation between the representatives of
labor and capital.




IX. WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT WORK.                                           80


While women and children have always assisted in the work of the home,
it was not until the development of the factory system that they began
to work for wages outside of the family. From the earliest days the
preparation of food, spinning and weaving and making up of garments,
and other branches of domestic economy had been the peculiar tasks of
the housewife. With the removal of the textile industries from the
home to the factory and the invention of light-running machinery, many
women followed them and employment was found also for young children.
Thus with the inception of the modern factory system and machine
production there arose the problem of woman and child labor. In
England the evils of the early factory system were incredibly bad.
“The beginning of the present century,” wrote President Walker,[20]
“found children of five, and even of three years of age, in England,
working in factories and brickyards; women working underground in
mines, harnessed with mules to carts, drawing heavy loads; found the
hours of labor whatever the avarice of individual mill owners might
exact, were it thirteen, or fourteen, or fifteen; found no guards
about machinery to protect life and limb; found the air of the factory
fouler than language can describe, even could human ears bear to hear
the story.” Conditions were never so bad in this country as in England
owing to the later development of the system and prompter legislation
against its evils, and especially to the scarcity of labor which
compelled employers to make the conditions of labor more attractive.

The field of employment for women has been a constantly expanding one.
When Miss Harriet Martineau visited the United States in 1840 she
found only seven occupations open to women, namely, teaching,
needle-work, keeping boarders, work in the cotton mills, type-setting,    81
book-binding, and domestic service. Since that time the area has
widened until there is scarcely an occupation in which women are not
found except those closed to her by law or by physical inability. The
number of females 10 years of age and over engaged in gainful
occupations was 2,647,000 in 1880 or 14.7 per cent of the total female
population; this number more than doubled in the next twenty years,
being 5,319,000 in 1900 or 18.8 per cent of all. The largest number
employed was in domestic and personal service, and next to that in
manufacturing and mechanical pursuits, though even in that branch they
were most numerous in the traditional branches of woman’s work, as
dressmakers, seamstresses, etc. It is nevertheless in the
manufacturing industries that the most serious evils connected with
woman and child labor are found. The problems differ greatly in
different sections of the United States: in the Atlantic states the
greatest proportion of women as compared with men find employment and
give rise to special problems of women’s work; in the South child
labor is more conspicuous; while in the West both woman and child
labor are of relatively small importance.

An interesting question suggests itself at this point: Is the increase
in the employment of women at the expense of men? Are the women
crowding the men out of their occupations and taking their places? At
first inspection the statistics of occupations would seem to lead to
an affirmative answer, for the percentage of women breadwinners
increased from 13.5 per cent of all such in 1880 to 16.6 per cent in
1900, while that of the men fell from 80 to 77.3 per cent, and that of
the children remained about the same. The cause of the change in the
proportion of the sexes was not due, however, to any falling off in
the number of men, but to the great influx of women into the ranks of
wage-workers. In some lines of employment, like those of bookkeepers,
stenographers, typewriters, clerks, etc., there has undoubtedly been      82
an encroachment and men have been displaced. But on the other hand,
many occupations have been opened to men during the last fifty years
that were unknown before. Such have been the expanding fields of
railroad construction and operation, the steel industry, the
utilization of electricity, and other similar lines. In most of these
the muscular effort involved or the character of the work have kept
women out, but in other lines where special rapidity or lightness of
touch are required the women outnumber the men, as in the manufacture
of cotton goods, hosiery, hats and caps, etc. The development and
improvement of machinery has of course favored the employment of
women. Mr. John A. Hobson[21] asserts that “in modern machinery a
larger and larger amount of inventive skill is engaged in adjusting
machine-tending to the physical and mental capacity of women and
children.” He concludes that if the exploitation of these forms of
cheap labor had not been prevented by factory legislation and by
public disapproval, “the great mass of the textile factories of this
country [England] would have been almost entirely worked by women and
children.” As a matter of fact one of the reasons for the great
expansion of woman labor in the United States as well as England is
because it has been found cheaper than man’s labor. We are thus
brought face to face with a fundamental question in the discussion of
the problem--why are women paid lower wages than men?

As to the fact there is no doubt; one comparison taken from the Census
of 1900 will be sufficient to illustrate it: the annual average
earnings of men in mechanical and manufacturing industries were $490,
and of women $272 per annum. The more important question is why this
difference exists. A number of reasons suggest themselves at once. In
the first place women are less efficient than men and produce less;       83
hence they are paid less. In some industries, particularly those
requiring physical strength, women cannot compete successfully, and
those are usually the highest paid employments. Other well-paid
industries are regarded by men as essentially their own and social
pressure is applied to keep women out. Then, too, woman’s ambition to
attain industrial efficiency is not so great, owing to her expectation
of marriage and release from industrial life. Women are more often
absent from work owing to sickness and domestic claims upon their
time; this irregularity of employment tends to reduce their
efficiency. But even in employments where the efficiency of men and
women are admittedly equal the women receive lower wages in the
majority of cases. According to a report of the Bureau of Labor, out
of 100 cases where the women did the same work as the men and did it
as well, they received lower wages than the men in 80. This leads to
the consideration of a second group of causes, which have to do with
woman’s standard of living. One reason why she receives less is
because she is able and willing to live on less. Physiologically, Dr.
Atwater has said, man needs one-fifth more nutriment than woman.
Women’s wages are less because of their somewhat lower cost of
subsistence. But even aside from this fact, the frequent partial
dependence of women upon other members of their family for support
makes them willing to accept less and consequently reduces their
wages. The average American workingwoman is young, only about
twenty-two and a half years old, and after the age of twenty-five is
reached the number declines rapidly. That is to say, working girls
regard their employment as a temporary affair, remaining only about
five years on the average in the store or factory; during this time
they often live at home with their parents and are content to receive
a wage much smaller than a man would require as head of a household.

The third reason is, however, the most important, because it explains     84
at the same time the low economic position which woman occupies in the
industrial world. The narrowing of the field within which women can
readily find employment has the effect of greatly intensifying the
competition within that field. There is also a great reserve army of
potential women wage-earners, whom a slight increase of wages or force
of circumstances--loss of employment by the male members of the
family--will bring into the field as competitors. There is, in other
words, a constant over-supply of labor in most women’s industries,
which does not exist in any men’s industries except the most
unskilled. Women exhibit, furthermore, a comparative lack of mobility
from one industry to another, as well as from one locality to another.
According to Professor Smart, women are so unready to leave home that
their pay on one side of narrow Scotland is 50 per cent lower than on
the other side. In the same way, the flow of labor from one occupation
to another, which tends to equalize the advantages and rates of pay of
different employments, is far feebler among women than among men.
Finally, there is little organization among women. Their
individualistic, almost jealous, attitude to one another prevents
their combination and united action, while their submissive acceptance
of what is offered leads to apathy. They have only infrequently formed
unions and endeavored to substitute collective bargaining for
individual action. Women are therefore industrially in much the same
situation as unskilled, unorganized male laborers, and the remedy in
both cases would seem to be the same--education and organization.

The presence of a large supply of cheap woman labor undoubtedly has a
depressing effect upon men’s wages, and consequently upon the standard
of life of the whole laboring class. George Gunton[22] is authority
for the statement that “in proportion as the wife and children
contribute to the support of the family the wages of the father are       85
reduced.” The family wage tends to remain the same whether it is
earned by the father alone, or by the father with the assistance of
his wife and children. It is, however, not quite clear in most cases
whether the men’s wages are low because the women and children work,
or whether the women and children work because the men’s wages are
low. It may fairly be concluded, however, that the evil effects of low
wages for women are not confined to themselves but are felt by all
with whom they come in competition.

What conclusion shall we draw then, in view of all these facts, as to
the desirability of employment of women? The fact of their low wages
and industrial dependence is not sufficient to lead one to condemn it.
These are transitional phenomena and can be remedied. Women have
always worked--on the farm, in the home, in making household supplies.
When this work was taken over by the factory woman became a
wage-worker in the modern sense. “The census records in respect to the
labor of women, therefore, read in the light of collateral facts, are
a history of industrial readjustment rather than a record of the
relative extent of the employment of women, and it is impossible to
say, so far as the census figures are concerned, whether a larger
proportion of women are actively engaged in labor today than formerly
or not. The one fact which is clear is that factory or shop work is
displacing home work, and that this readjustment of industrial
conditions is leading to the employment of women outside the home in
constantly increasing numbers.”[23] The effect of this readjustment
has been to increase greatly the production of wealth. The production
of household supplies was removed from the family to the factory when
it was handed over to machinery and done better and more cheaply. If
the work of women thus released were expended for no useful purpose
society would gain only in the increased leisure of the women. But if     86
these then took up other new lines or set men free from old
employments so that they could turn to still different ones, then the
production of goods could be greatly increased. “Without women’s
help,” says Mr. George L. Bolen,[24] “their work in stores and offices
would be done by men taken from other employment. The latter’s present
work would have to be stopped to that extent, lessening the quantity
of goods produced by men. The effect would be the same as if a farmer
had to stop plowing two hours before noon to go to the house and cook
his dinner…. Women behind the counter, and at the typewriter,
release men for work that women cannot do.” From the standpoint of
woman herself, industrial independence must be regarded as a great
gain. Set free from the necessity of contracting marriage for the sake
of a home, and of depending upon mere sex attraction to attain that
end, she will develop her capacities more fully and when she does
enter upon marriage will do so as a result of mutual attraction. The
entrance of women into gainful occupations must be regarded as an
essential step in their own progress and the improvement of society.

Quite different must be our attitude towards child labor, which can
only be condemned as a waste of labor power and as stunting the
development of the children. The Census of 1870 stated for the first
time the number of children at work in the United States; there were
739,164 between the ages of 10 and 15 years, of whom 114,628 were
employed in manufactures. During the next decade the number increased
over 58 per cent to 1,118,356 children at work in all occupations. The
disclosure of such an undesirable tendency called forth restrictive
legislation in most of the states and the number declined materially
by 1890. Since 1890 however there has been a reversal of this tendency
back to the conditions of 1880, owing chiefly to the industrial           87
development of the South, where almost no factory legislation exists
as yet. In 1904 there were 1,752,187 children at work between the ages
of 10 and 15 years, or almost one-fifth of all the children of those
ages. The evils connected with child labor are the long hours--usually
11 or 12 hours a day where no restrictive legislation exists--and the
exhausting and often dangerous work. The effect on the health of the
children of monotonous and exhausting toil before their muscles are
set and their frames knit up is thoroughly bad; they are stunted and
deformed and prematurely aged. Many of the occupations, too, in which
child laborers are most numerous, are dangerous or injurious, as tin
can factories, saw mills, paper box factories, type foundries, and
tobacco establishments. Second only to the physical effects of child
labor is the mental and moral injury suffered not merely by the child
but also by society in depriving these youthful laborers of a thorough
education. While it is well that children should be kept busy, there
is no compensating reward either in money wage or preparation for
adult life in such monotonous, profitless drudgery. The influence of
the competition of children upon wages is leveling, and their
employment indicates either a willingness on the part of employers and
parents to exploit this cheap and defenseless form of labor, or a
backward state of civilization. Such an evil can be cured only by
determined public opposition, by the passage of laws forbidding all
labor by children under a certain age, say 15 (except possibly in
agricultural or housework), compelling school attendance, and
providing for careful inspection. Most of all is needed an aroused
public conscience.

Labor legislation is the most effective method of improving the
conditions of employment, and to a consideration of this subject we
must devote the remainder of this section. We have already seen that
the fundamental principle of our modern wage system is freedom of
contract. This is guaranteed in our federal and state constitutions       88
as both a personal and a property right. As a result of this fact the
courts have generally declared unconstitutional any legislation,
designed to protect the interests of labor, that seemed to abrogate
this freedom of contract or that savored of class legislation. Efforts
to improve the condition of labor by legislation have therefore met
with especial obstacles in this country. On the whole, however, means
have been discovered of evading these constitutional restrictions when
it has seemed clearly demanded by the welfare of society, and the
history of labor legislation in this country is one of fairly steady
progress. The early laws were practically confined to imprisonment for
debt, mechanics’ liens, the hours of education of children employed in
factories, and similar matters. Nothing noteworthy was accomplished
until 1866 when Massachusetts passed an eight-hour child labor law for
children under fourteen; in 1874 she passed a ten-hour law for women
and children under eighteen, engaged in manufacturing establishments,
and in 1877 enacted the first factory inspection act, which has since
been copied in about twenty-four states, and without which mere
legislation is of little avail.

The factory acts may be divided into two classes, those that endeavor
to secure the safe or healthful manner of conducting a business, and
those that attempt to limit the occupations, the hours, and the
methods of payment of the workers. Under the first head come such
matters as fire protection, ventilation, guarding of machinery,
inspection of boilers and mines, etc. Such legislation and inspection
have in many states been extended to churches, schoolhouses, hotels,
theaters and public buildings. The second group includes those laws
which are usually meant when factory acts are referred to. In England
there has been a very steady development and extension of such
legislation, beginning in 1802, when Peel’s Act tried to protect the
health and morals of the pauper apprentices in the cotton mills; this     89
was extended to all young people in textile industries in 1833, to
women in 1844, then to all large industries in 1864, and to smaller
ones in 1867, and finally in 1878 these various provisions were
codified into a complete factory act, regulating the health and safety
of the laboring people generally. In the United States the movement
was considerably later and has not been so uninterrupted. But today
laws limiting the number of hours of labor to eight have been passed
by the Federal Government and fifteen of the states for all those
engaged on public works. Attempts to fix the hours of labor of adult
male workers have usually been declared unconstitutional, for the
reasons stated above, except in especially dangerous or unhealthful
occupations, as bakeries, mines, smelters and similar lines.
Consequently the men have been forced to rely largely upon their own
efforts for the redress of industrial grievances; in this fact lies
one explanation of the growth and strength of labor organizations in
this country. On the other hand, legislation in behalf of women and
especially children--wards of the state--has usually been held
constitutional by the courts, and has had a more extended application.
About twenty of the states have regulated the length of the working
day for women and children. Special child labor laws limit the age
below which employment is illegal, usually between ten and fourteen
years of age; and provide for a minimum of education before a child
can be employed. About half the states provide for factory inspection
to see that the provisions of the various acts are lived up to. In
general we may conclude that by the passage of such legislation
society has definitely decided that there are some conditions of
employment that cannot be safely left to free contract or to
collective bargaining between employer and employe, but that they must
be regulated by society itself on the broad grounds of social welfare.




X. UNEMPLOYMENT AND INSURANCE.                                            90


The greatest problem in modern industry as well as the
greatest curse to the laboring classes, is unemployment. While
unemployment has always existed under all systems of labor, it assumed
added significance when the introduction of the wage system threw
every worker upon his own resources and made him responsible for the
care of himself and his family. Modern industry is sensitive and
unstable and its delicate mechanism, very likely to get out of order;
credit and fashion, to mention no others, are factors that make for
instability, and these are essentially modern. Professor Marshall is
of the opinion that the factory system has not increased inconstancy
of employment, but has simply rendered it plainer by localizing it.
But whether more or fewer than in earlier times, the number of the
unemployed in modern industry is appallingly great. It is not easy to
estimate correctly the extent and amount of this evil and we
accordingly find considerable variations in the statistical
presentations of fact. In 1885 two investigations of the amount of
employment were made, one by Carroll D. Wright, in his report as
United States Commissioner of Labor for 1886, and the other by the
Massachusetts Bureau of Labor in its report for 1887. Mr. Wright
defines the unemployed very narrowly as “those who under prosperous
times would be fully employed, and who, during the time mentioned,
were seeking employment”; using the term in this restricted sense he
concluded that 7½ per cent of the working population engaged in
manufacturing and mechanical pursuits, and trade and transportation
were idle during the year, which moreover he considered one of extreme
depression. The Massachusetts statistics, on the other hand, were
presented as indicative of general conditions in normal years and may
safely be regarded as such. According to this report, 30 per cent of
the total number of breadwinners in the state had been unemployed at      91
their principal occupations on an average of 4.11 months in the year
covered; some of these found work at other or secondary occupations.
But the net result of the investigation was well put in the terse
statement of the report, that “about one-third of the total persons
engaged in remunerative labor were unemployed at their principal
occupation for about one-third of the working time.” At the lowest
estimate the whole working population lost on the average almost
one-tenth of their working time. The loss of such a proportion of the
community’s productive force, with all the demoralization attendant
upon irregular or no labor, is evidence of a problem of grave import.

Unemployment is such a broad term and covers so many different ideas
that it will be well to classify the unemployed before proceeding
further. They may be logically divided into the following classes: I.
The temporarily unemployed, who comprise (a) those certain of work
again, as efficient workmen who are temporarily out of work owing to
seasonal variations, shut downs, etc.; (b) those without such
prospect, a group which again divides into two groups, namely, (1)
efficient and industrious workmen who have been thrown out of work by
a change in fashion, the introduction of new machinery, foreign
competition, a prolonged depression, etc., and (2) those whose work is
essentially fluctuating and casual in its nature, as casual day
laborers, charwomen, etc. II. The permanently unemployed, consisting
in turn of (a) the “won’t-works,” as tramps, and (b) the
“can’t-works,” or the defective and dependent classes generally. Such
a classification renders much easier the analysis both of the causes
and of the cure of unemployment.

The first question that presents itself in any discussion of the
causes of unemployment is whether it is due primarily to personal
causes, as inefficiency or intemperance, or to industrial causes over
which the individual has no control. “Personal causes are those           92
mental, moral, and physical defects which show themselves either in
the inability and inefficiency of the workman or in his unwillingness
to work. Here are included all the varieties of personal inaptitude,
ranging from idiocy, intemperance, and vice to old age, sickness, and
accident.”[25] Such a comprehensive definition includes many cases, of
course, where no blame can be attached to the individual, and yet each
one of these causes is personal, that is, it does not affect at the
same time a whole group, as an industrial depression would do. Persons
included in this group are always on the margin of employment; in bad
times the first to be discharged, in good times they are the last to
be employed. Nor is the cause of their lack of employment always easy
to give; it may be itself the result of industrial accident or
unhealthful occupation, or the result of heredity, evil habits and
associations, and defective education. We may present two tables
giving briefly the causes of poverty and unemployment. The first gives
the causes of poverty ascribed by the charity organization societies
of New York, Boston, and Baltimore to applicants for relief:

  Causes of poverty: charity organization society records.[A]

  =================================+===================
               Cause.              |     Per cent.
  ---------------------------------+---------+---------
  Drink                            |  13.7   |
  Shiftlessness and inefficiency   |   7.5   |
  Other moral defects              |   2.1   |
        Total, Character           |         |   23.3
  ---------------------------------+---------+---------
  No male support                  |   5.0   |
  Lack of other normal support     |   3.6   |
        Total, Support             |         |    8.6
  ---------------------------------+---------+--------
  Lack of employment               |  23.5   |
  Insufficient employment          |   8.1   |
  Poorly paid, etc.                |   3.3   |
        Total, Employment          |         |   34.9
  ---------------------------------+---------+--------
  Sickness and death in family     |  21.1   |                            93
  Insanity and physical defects    |   4.1   |
  Old Age                          |   3.9   |
  Other incapacity                 |   3.2   |
        Total, Incapacity          |         |   32.3
  ---------------------------------+---------+--------
                                   | 100.    |  100.
  ---------------------------------+---------+--------

  [A] Warner, American Charities, Rev. Ed., 53.

The first group of causes indicates misconduct, as the last group
indicates misfortune; the other two shade off into industrial causes,
though lack of employment--the largest single cause--may in turn be
ascribed to any one of several remoter causes according to the bias of
the investigator. This table is a record of the causes of failure on
the part of those who have fallen behind or dropped out altogether in
the race of life. At the other end of the scale stand the members of
labor organization, on the whole, the elite of the labor world. The
following table gives the causes of unemployment of 31,339 cases at
the end of September, 1900, as reported to the New York Bureau of
Labor Statistics:

  Causes of idleness, members of trade unions, 1900.

  ---------------------+-----------
          Cause        | Per Cent
  ---------------------+-----------
  No work              |    75.5
  Bad weather          |      .5
  Strike or lockout    |    13.0
  Sickness             |     4.7
  Superannuation       |     1.6
  Other causes         |     4.7
                       |
        Total          |   100.0
  ---------------------+----------

This table emphasizes very strongly the industrial causes of
unemployment, three-fourths of which is ascribed to lack of work. In
some cases, as the iron and steel workers, where there is a regular       94
two months’ shut-down to make repairs, and the building trades where
the inclemency of the weather usually prevents work during the winter,
the lack of employment may be regarded as a vacation rather than a
hardship, for the rates of pay are high enough during the remaining
months to offset those of idleness. In other cases, however, as in
coal-mining, there is a large reserve army of workers on hand and
employment is secured for only one-half to two-thirds the time. In
1900, when the average number of days of employment was larger than it
had been in ten years, the bituminous miners were employed only 234
days and the anthracite miners only 166 days in the year. This
indicates a very bad organization of the industry. The same thing was
formerly true of the London dockyards, where there was a reserve army
of some 4,000 surplus workers. Of course the effect of this is to
depress wages. The clothing trade is subject to seasonal fluctuations
and the caprice of fashion, and offers very irregular employment.
Machinery and improved processes were frequently spoken of by
witnesses before the Industrial Commission as the leading cause of
unemployment. If the general conditions of business are good at the
time of the first introduction of machinery the displaced laborer is
reabsorbed again and the hardship is not so noticeable. But if it
coincides with a period of business depression the introduction of
machinery appears to be the cause of a large displacement of labor,
which might more truly be ascribed to industrial depression. This last
cause is responsible for enormous suffering among the laboring
classes, for the method oftenest resorted to by industrial enterprises
to reduce expenses is the wholesale discharge of laborers, who are
thus made to bear the burden of industrial disorganization. This was
well illustrated by the economies effected by the railroads in the
year 1908, in their general reduction of the labor force and of wages.
But even in good years the inconstancy of employment is startling. In     95
the four years 1897-1900 the men in trade unions in New York State
lost 16.2 per cent of their time from unemployment, which is almost
exactly one day in every week. And these, it must be remembered, were
skilled and efficient workers in organized trades. Finally, strikes
are given as a cause of unemployment in the table; these are a
peculiar feature of modern industry, and do not call for further
discussion, except to point out that they are not as important as
often represented.

The foregoing analysis of the causes of unemployment shows that they
are deep-seated in the nature of modern industry, and that it would be
unjust to the workingman to attribute them in any large measure to his
incapacity or indisposition to labor. The care of the unemployable
must of course be undertaken by society, and such persons prevented as
far as possible from depressing the wages of competent labor by their
competition. Exceptional periods of distress may and should be met by
temporary relief measures. But what we may call the normal
unemployment in modern industry, which amounts to 2-2½ per cent of
the labor force, cannot be overcome by direct methods. The remedy for
this lies “in a better organization of employers and employes, more
steady expansion of trade, and greater stability of industry and of
legislation affecting industry. These are not problems directly of
unemployment, but rather of taxation, currency, monopoly, immigration,
over-production, and technical advances in industry. Their treatment
must be undertaken, not primarily as measures of providing for the
unemployed, but as measures for improving the conditions of
business.”[26] The problem of unemployment would thus seem to be a
permanent one, bound up in the very nature of a dynamic society; it
may be regarded as the price of progress. But the question may fairly
be raised as to whether the laboring classes should foot the bill,        96
or whether the cost might not fairly be borne by society as a whole.
This has suggested, as a solution of the problem, insurance of
workingmen against unemployment, a discussion of which, however, must
be deferred to the end of the section. Some methods of alleviation, if
not of abolition, of the evils of unemployment may be suggested. Free
public employment bureaus and agencies, national in scope and well
integrated, would do much to secure a better adjustment of demand and
supply in the labor market, and secure a better distribution of the
labor force and greater mobility of labor. Better organization and
mutual understanding on the part of both employers and employes is
needed, to prevent the loss through strikes and lockouts. And finally,
improved industrial and technical education is essential, whereby the
loss in skill through the introduction of new inventions and machinery
may be minimized, and the productivity of the laboring class be
increased.

Among the measures of relief for unemployment due to accident,
sickness, and old age, none is more important or more deserving of a
hearing in the United States than that of insurance against these
evils. The earnings of the average male wage-earner are so small--half
of the number earn annually less than $436, and half of the adult male
factory workers earn less than $400 a year--that the unemployment,
sickness, disablement, or old age of the breadwinner must throw a
large proportion of families so afflicted into a condition of periodic
poverty. Any remedies that will alleviate the miseries caused by
fluctuations in employment, industrial accidents, diseases incident to
industry, etc., deserve a respectful hearing.

No adequate statistics of industrial accidents exist in the United
States, but a recent estimate by F. L. Hoffman[27] gave the number of
fatal accidents among occupied males in 1908 as between 30,000 and
35,000. An analysis of the reports of the New York Bureau of Labor        97
Statistics from 1901 to 1906, shows that of the total number (39,244)
of industrial accidents reported in that state a little over 2 per
cent were fatal, almost 17 per cent resulted in permanent disablement,
and 81 per cent resulted in temporary disablement. More than half of
the accidents in industry are the result of machinery in motion. Mr.
Hoffman calculates that “it should not be impossible to save at least
one-third or perhaps one-half by intelligent and rational methods of
factory inspection, legislation, and control.” Prevention of accidents
rather than compensation to the workingman after they occur should be
the aim of society, in order to avoid the wasteful loss of productive
power, not to mention the suffering and misery entailed by such
accidents. “Immunity, not compensation,” has been the demand of the
British trade unions. Of first importance then is careful factory
legislation, safeguarding of machinery, and factory inspection. But
here we are interested primarily in the question of responsibility and
compensation. In the United States, legislatures and the courts have
taken the position that the workingman was responsible unless he could
prove the employer responsible for his injury. How impossible such
proof is and consequently how intenable such a position, is clear from
the following table, compiled by the German Government for purposes of
accident insurance:

  Accidents in German industries traceable to different causes.

  ==============================+=============+==========+========
             Causes.            | Agriculture | Industry | Mining
                                |   (1891)    |  (1887)  | (1887)
  ------------------------------+-------------+----------+--------
  Fault of employer             |     18.2    |   19.8   |    1.3
  Fault of injured workman      |     24.4    |   25.0   |   29.8
  Fault of both                 |     20.1    |    4.4   |
  Fault of third person         |      2.8    |    3.3   |    4.3
  Unavoidable or indeterminable |     34.5    |   46.9   |   64.6
                                +-------------+----------+--------
      Total                     |    100.0    |  100.0   |  100.0
  ------------------------------+-------------+----------+--------

Statistics from both Germany and Austria show that a full half or         98
more of all industrial accidents are due to causes for which neither
employers, injured workmen, nor fellow employes are responsible, but
which are incidental to the nature of the industry itself. But besides
the danger of injury from machinery, there are numerous specially
dangerous or injurious trades, in which injury by poisoning, disease,
etc., is almost unavoidable as trade processes are at present
conducted. These have been classified as follows: trades in which lead
is a poisonous element, trades which produce other chemical poisons,
trades in which lockjaw is an incident, trades in which the danger
arises from injurious particles in the air, or from dust, processes
that require a sudden change from heat to cold and vice versa, and
those that require artificial humidity, and trades in which accidents
are so frequent as to demand special legislation. Before we try to
decide who in justice should bear the cost of sickness or injury
arising from these causes, let us inquire as to the practice in the
United States and in other countries, so as to have the data necessary
for a fair conclusion.

The original legal doctrine regarding liability for accident in
England and America, which is still practically unmodified in the
latter country, was based on the principle of individual
responsibility for acts of negligence. Briefly stated the common law
doctrine is that an employer must provide reasonably safe conditions
of employment, and that then the employe assumes the risks incident to
the occupation, or arising from the carelessness of fellow-servants;
moreover, even if the employer has been remiss, the employe cannot
collect damages if he has been guilty of contributory negligence.
These three doctrines--assumption of risk, doctrine of the
fellow-servant, and contributory negligence--have been used
practically to free the employer from all responsibility in cases
where injured employes have sought to secure damages. Moreover, as
has been shown above, many cases exist where it is impossible to fix      99
the blame on either employer, employe, or a third party, and in such
cases no compensation could be secured for injury under the law. The
full rigor of the common law, which has worked out so unfairly for the
workingman in modern machine production, has been modified in about
twenty-seven states by statutes defining more exactly the duties of
the employer, and repealing the fellow-servant doctrine in regard to
railway employes and in a few states in regard to all mechanical
industries. With these exceptions, however, the law of employers’
liability has not been changed, and compensation for industrial
accidents must be sought by injured employes through a suit for
damages against the employer. In 1906 and again in 1908 Congress
passed a federal employers’ liability act, limited to common carriers,
which, however, represents only development along the lines of
negligence law. That is, we are still proceeding upon the assumption
that in every accident which occurs somebody is to blame. We shall
have to look to foreign countries for a practical application of the
principle that the cost of accidents in modern industry should be made
a charge upon the industry itself, and ultimately be incorporated in
the higher price of the article produced.

Germany was the first country to introduce the principle of compulsory
accident insurance in 1884. Employers are there organized into
associations and sections and are compelled to bear the expense of
granting to injured workingmen compensation, which amounts to about
two-thirds their average wages. England in 1897, by the passage of the
Workmen’s Compensation Act, adopted the principle “that a workman is
entitled for all accidents of occupation to a moderate and reasonable
compensation.” Twenty-three countries, or practically all the advanced
industrial nations of the world except the United States, have passed
laws to compensate sufferers for all accidents of industry, thus         100
placing the burden of industrial accidents upon the industry as such
and not upon the laborer.

As we have seen, sickness and old age are still more usual causes of
poverty and unemployment than accident. All the arguments for
compulsory insurance therefore apply with redoubled force to these
evils. Germany was again the pioneer in the establishment of these
forms of insurance. In 1883 sickness insurance was organized, being
made compulsory for all persons with incomes under $500; the expense
is borne one-third by the workers and two-thirds by employers, the
main purpose being to secure a sufficient relief--amounting to
one-half the wage--for a period of thirteen weeks. In 1889 invalidity
and old-age insurance was introduced for the same class; contributions
are made in equal proportion by employe and employer, the state
contributing about $12 a year to each annuity. Pensions are granted
after thirty years of payment or to those over seventy. In 1908 Great
Britain passed a still more comprehensive measure, providing for
pensioning all citizens of seventy years or over, who have been
residents for twenty years, in accordance with a sliding scale based
upon private income, the pensions ranging from five shillings weekly
down to one shilling. The pensions were expected to cost $35,000,000
the first year, but will probably entail double that amount. Finally,
insurance against unemployment was tried in Switzerland in 1893 to
1897, but was finally abolished, owing to abuses and difficulty of
administration.

There are probably no more important practical economic problems than
those connected with unemployment and workingmen’s insurance. Slowly
the conviction has spread that under present conditions of industry
workingmen cannot fairly be held responsible for industrial accidents,
and that with prevailing wages they cannot be expected to save enough
to maintain themselves in sickness and old age. It therefore becomes
the duty of society so to organize industry and legislation that the     101
terrors of accidents, sickness, and old age, shall be reduced to a
minimum.




XI. MACHINERY AND INDUSTRIAL EFFICIENCY.


So far in the discussion of modern capitalistic production and of the
various labor problems to which it has given rise we have not treated
in detail the question of machinery and its effects on labor. We
cannot, however, leave this subject without taking up this phase of it
with considerable care. The advantages of machinery have been more
often emphasized than the evils, so that we may profitably begin with
the darker side of the picture. President Hadley[28] enumerates three
evils which are charged against machinery, as now managed and
operated: “1. That it displaces a large amount of human labor, thus
taking income away from employes and giving it to employers. 2. That
when it does not actually drive human labor out of use, it employs it
in circumstances unfavorable to efficiency, health, and morals. 3.
That under the best conditions it deprives the workman of
independence, making him a specialized machine instead of a
broad-minded man.” We cannot do better than take up these points one
by one.

In answer to the first charge President Hadley flatly denies that
machinery has displaced labor, but insists that “there has been a most
conspicuous increase of employment in those lines where improvements
in machinery have been greatest,” giving the expansion of railroads as
an illustration. But it is not possible to generalize from this case
without further analysis. The immediate effect of improved machinery,
especially if suddenly introduced, is practically always to throw men
out of employment. The extent to which this will occur depends on the
suddenness and extensiveness of the change, but fortunately, as
Professor Nicholson points out, new inventions seldom come suddenly or
are introduced all at once on an extensive scale. It took almost a
generation, for example, for American machine methods to displace        102
Swiss hand labor in the making of watches. But when such a change does
occur it hits hardest the least efficient and older men, those just on
the margin of employment, for a man past middle life can rarely learn
a new trade. The effect of displacement in causing suffering will also
depend somewhat upon the mobility of labor, both the knowledge of new
opportunities and the capital to make possible a change of location or
industry, and improvements in the means of transportation. It can
easily be shown that as a general principle the lump-of-labor theory
is erroneous, namely, that there is just so much work to be done and
that if machinery is introduced there will be less work for men to do.
But there is this element of truth in it, that the question whether
men will be reabsorbed in the same industry depends upon the fact as
to whether the market for the goods produced by the new machine can be
expanded. If the demand is elastic, that is, can be largely extended
because of the fall in price brought about by the cheaper production,
as in the case of cotton goods, then the displaced laborers will
probably be re-employed to produce an enlarged supply. If, however,
the demand is inelastic, that is, will not be expanded by reason of a
fall in price, as in the case of salt or coffins, then the displaced
labor will not be reabsorbed in the same industry but must look
elsewhere for employment.

The elaborate investigation of the Department of Labor in 1898
regarding the relative merits of hand and machine labor shows clearly
the effect on the displacement of labor by the introduction of
machinery. A few cases will serve as illustrations (see table on next
page).

These cases, chosen at random, all show an increase in the number of
different men employed, and an immense saving in time and in labor
cost. Nothing is indicated however as to the total amount of
employment. Optimistic writers like Carroll D. Wright claim that if

  Hand and Machine Methods Compared.                                     103

  ===========+======================+============+===========+
     Year    |                      | Different  | Different |
      of     |   Article produced   | operations |  workmen  +
  production |                      | performed  | employed  |
  -----------+----------------------+------------+-----------+
    1829-30  | Wheat (hand)         |      8     |      4    |
    1895-96  | Wheat (machine)      |      5     |      6    |
             |                      |            |           |
    1859     | Boots (hand)         |     83     |      2    |
    1895     | Boots (machine)      |    122     |    113    |
             |                      |            |           |
    1850     | Carpet (hand)        |     15     |     18    |
    1895     | Carpet (machine)     |     41     |     81    |
             |                      |            |           |
    1891     |Loading ore (hand)    |      1     |           1    |
    1896     |Loading ore (machine) |      3     |     10    |
  -----------+----------------------+------------+-----------+
  ===========+======================+================+========
     Year    |                      |   Time worked. |
      of     |   Article produced   +-------+--------+ Labor
  production |                      | Hours | Minutes| Cost
  -----------+----------------------+-------+--------+--------
    1829-30  | Wheat (hand)         |    61 |    5   |  $3.55
    1895-96  | Wheat (machine)      |     3 |   19   |    .66
             |                      |       |        |
    1859     | Boots (hand)         |  1436 |   40   | 408.50
    1895     | Boots (machine)      |   154 |    5   |  35.40
             |                      |       |        |
    1850     | Carpet (hand)        |  4047 |   30   |  20.24
    1895     | Carpet (machine)     |   509 |    1   |    .29
             |                      |       |        |
    1891     |Loading ore (hand)    |   200 |    0   |  40.00
    1896     |Loading ore (machine) |     2 |   51   |    .55
  -----------+----------------------+-------+--------+--------

machinery has displaced labor in one direction it has created more
employment for them in others. He shows for instance[29] that the per
capita consumption of cotton in this country in 1830 was 5.9 lbs.,
while in 1890 it was 19 lbs., and gives similar figures for iron and
steel, and railroad traffic. It will be noticed that all of his
examples are chosen from industries in which the demand is elastic.
Mr. J. A. Hobson, a more careful and conservative writer, draws less
optimistic conclusions from a study of Great Britain. He says: “First,
so far as the aggregate of manufactures is concerned, the net result
of the increased use of machinery has not been to offer an increased
demand for labor in those industries commensurate with the growth of
the working population. Second, an increased proportion of the
manufacturing population is employed either in those branches of the
large industries where machinery is least used, or in the smaller
manufactures which are either subsidiary to the large industries, or
are engaged in providing miscellaneous comforts and luxuries.”[30] It
must be said, however, in modification of Mr. Hobson’s inferences,
that it may be accounted as a social gain if the demand for
manufactured commodities can be met by the labor of a smaller            104
proportion of the population, since the energies of the rest are then
set free for professional or artistic or similar pursuits. A study of
the census reports of Great Britain seems to show that this is what
has happened in that country.

The amount of labor is not the only factor to be considered; the
regularity of employment, as we saw in the last section, is of hardly
less importance. “Another danger of an entirely opposite kind,” says
Professor Nicholson[31], “lurks in this immense power of machinery,
which is continually showing its reality and remedies for which will,
it is to be feared, be the fruit of long years of tentative adaptation
to the new environment. What all sensible workingmen desire, what the
advocates of the trade unions say is their chief object, is to get a
“steady sufficient wage,” but it has been proved inductively that
great fluctuations in price occur in those commodities which require
for their production a large proportion of fixed capital. These
fluctuations in price are accompanied by corresponding fluctuations in
wages and irregularity of employment. But fluctuations in wages and
discontinuities in employment are two of the greatest evils which can
befall the laboring classes.” We have already seen how modern
capitalistic methods of production may lead to over-production and to
a crisis. We now see how machine methods may cause unemployment or
irregular employment. The men displaced directly by new machinery,
those thrown out of work by industrial depression resulting from
over-production in machine industries, and finally those irregularly
employed in the new occupations supplying luxuries--all of these may
fairly attribute their suffering in large measure to machine methods.

“The second great charge made against the factory system is that it
displaces a higher grade of labor by a lower grade; sometimes            105
substituting the work of women and children for that of men; sometimes
substituting work under conditions physically or morally unhealthful,
for work under healthful conditions; sometimes substituting
specialized and mechanical work for diversified occupation which
contributes to general intelligence.” The point as to the labor of
women and children has already been discussed. The charge that factory
labor is physically unhealthful may in general be denied. Mr. Wright,
in an elaborate defense of the factory system in the Tenth Census,
concluded that the conditions of work in the modern factory are much
more conducive to good health than those under the preceding domestic
system, while morally they are far superior. The qualities demanded by
the machine production of the modern factory are punctuality,
steadiness, reliability, and sobriety, and it therefore makes against
intemperance and immorality. So far as these exist in factory towns,
they are the result of town life rather than of manufacturing. It
must, however, be said that while the factory system is not inherently
unhealthful, the high pressure at which operatives of steam-driven
machinery are compelled to work, particularly in this country, may and
often does wear him out prematurely. This again is partially offset by
a shortening of the hours of labor.

The final charge against the factory system is monotony of work. Many
writers, from Adam Smith down, take the view that it is more
stupefying to make a small part of an article, say the sixty-fourth
part of a shoe, than to make the whole article. Professor Marshall,
who has considered the subject carefully[32], concludes that while it
takes away manual skill, it substitutes higher or more intellectual
forms of skill. “The more delicate the machine’s power the greater is
the judgment and carefulness which is called for from those who see
after it.” But after all there is less danger from monotony of work      106
than from monotony of life, and the cure for this would seem to be in
an increase of machinery rather than in its abolition.

Let us now try to summarize our conclusions on this intricate
question. The first effects of the introduction of labor-saving
machinery is to displace particular laborers; these suffer real
injury, though they are often reabsorbed in the industrial organism.
The social gain is undoubted, for the improved methods lead to lower
prices and thus to an increase in the real wages of labor. To the
improvement and wider use of machinery we must indeed look for the
ultimate relief of the human race from exhausting toil. Says a
socialist writer: “On mechanical slavery, on the slavery of the
machine, the future of the world depends…. All unintellectual labor,
all monotonous, dull labor, all labor that deals with dreadful things,
and involves unpleasant conditions, must be done by machinery.
Machinery must work for us in coal mines, and do all sanitary
services, and be the stoker of steamers, and clean the streets, and
run messages on wet days, and do anything that is tedious or
distressing.” If labor today has a complaint to make against the use
of machinery, it is that labor has not shared sufficiently in the
improvements thus far effected. But the evil here is connected with
the inequitable distribution of wealth, not with the methods of its
production. In justice labor should share in the technical
improvements which characterized the nineteenth century and will
revolutionize to a still greater extent the industries of the
twentieth. The practical question in this connection is as to the best
method for labor to secure its claim to a share in the increased
production. One answer, to which we will turn next, is by increasing
its efficiency through better industrial education and training.

The subject of industrial education has recently been receiving
considerable attention in the United States and the needs and
shortcomings of our country in this regard have been described. Under    107
modern methods of production, with their extreme specialization of
labor and extended use of machinery, it is practically impossible for
a worker to secure an adequate knowledge of a trade in the actual
practice of it. In former days boys acquired training in their trades
by the system of apprenticeship under the immediate charge of a master
of the craft. The system of apprenticeship has today almost
disappeared; boys are taken into shops as helpers, not as apprentices,
and receive practically no systematic instruction in their trade,
especially in a modern large establishment. In consequence of these
facts it is insisted that school instruction should be given to make
good the absence of shop practice; that a general system of industrial
education should be developed to give our workingmen systematic
training in the various trades. The superiority of the opportunities
for industrial education on the continent of Europe, especially in
Germany, have been frequently emphasized, and their industrial advance
has been credited in large measure to this fact. We can probably not
approach the subject better than by explaining the systems in these
other countries and then comparing them with that of the United
States.

Beginning with Germany as the country in which industrial education
has received the greatest attention, we find there three different
kinds of schools, which we may call the lower, middle, and higher. The
lower group includes artisan and specialized trade schools, and is
intended to be a substitute for the apprenticeship system. While they
have an important influence on the general industrial efficiency of
the nation, they concern chiefly the small handicrafts. The middle
group comprises the trade schools (gewerbeschulen), of which the most
famous are the weaving and dyeing schools at Chemnitz; other branches
taught are soap-boiling, milling, building, pottery, etc. These are
the schools that provide technical instruction for the large             108
manufacturing industries, and are consequently of great importance;
they train the foremen, superintendents, managers, and heads of
establishments rather than the workingmen. The higher group is formed
of the technical high schools or technological institutes, where are
trained the scientific experts. The importance of the German system
lies in the development of the last two groups rather than in
provision for the training of the workmen. Germany’s recent industrial
advance must be credited to the training of the officers, not the rank
and file, in the industrial army, to the development of managerial
ability rather than of manual skill.

In England the last twenty years have seen a marvelous development in
industrial education, brought about in part by the “made in Germany”
agitation. The English system differs from the German in educating
working-class boys, while at work in the mill or at the forge, into
foremen, managers, etc., mainly by means of evening classes in trade
or technical schools. The German system, on the other hand, trained
men who already had a superior general education. These schools are
regarded as stepping stones for the more ambitious and intelligent
young workingmen. They give a practical grasp of the subjects, but do
not teach actual processes of manufacture, owing to trade union
objections. They thus come between the lower and middle schools in
Germany. The higher technical schools also exist and have recently
been greatly expanded.

The system of industrial education in the United States may be said to
resemble that of Germany more than England in that it supplies
industries from above rather than from below, but it is in a very
chaotic state as yet. The most important schools are institutes of
technology and the technical departments of the universities, but
these train men only for the highest positions. Provision for the
industrial training of the workingman is almost lacking except in a      109
few manufacturing centers. Thus there are a few trade schools
resembling somewhat those in the Middle German group, as the textile
schools at Philadelphia, Lowell, and a few other cities. Lower trade
schools are found in New York City, but hardly anywhere else. That
there is a distinct need of and demand for instruction of this
character is shown by the enormous expansion of correspondence
schools, a peculiarly American institution, which endeavor to give the
training afforded by the English schools to the more ambitious young
artisans.

So far in their industrial development the people of the United States
have been immensely aided by two factors: the rich natural resources
of the country, and the high quality of the labor. But as we have
already seen, the natural resources are being either rapidly exhausted
or monopolized. As to the character of the second factor, we may quote
from the testimony of a recent careful observer, Dr. A. Shadwell[33]:
“The American method of work in the industrial sphere is distinguished
by the following features: enterprise, audacity, push, restlessness,
eagerness for novelty, inventiveness, emulation, and cupidity.
Employers and employed have exhibited the same qualities in their
degree.”… But they suffer “from the national defect of want of
thoroughness, which arises from the craving for short cuts.” Now that
American industries are entering the markets of the world in
international competition, it becomes important to correct any faults
that will cause us to fall behind. So far the movement for better
industrial education through the establishment of trade schools has
met two obstacles in this country. The first is the hostility of the
trade unions, which fear to see their control of the labor market
disturbed by the annual turning out of hundreds or thousands of
workers from the trade schools without any especial sympathy with
trade union methods or policies. The other difficulty lies in the        110
satisfaction with prevailing methods, the belief that the American
workman without training possesses skill superior to that of his
European competitors, and a naïve national self-conceit in all things
American. Now that we are for almost the first time in a hundred years
measuring our industrial efficiency in foreign markets against our
European competitors, we shall be compelled to take stock of all the
items that make for industrial supremacy. There seems to be little
doubt that when once this is fairly done, the need of a better system
of industrial education will be recognized and met.




XII. PROFIT-SHARING AND CO-OPERATION.


Among the reforms suggested for remedying some of the evils incident
to the modern wage system those of profit-sharing and co-operation
occupy a prominent place. The separation of the community into
capitalists and laborers, classes different in conditions and ideals,
constitutes a menace to the peace and progress of industrial society.
The wage system moreover is thought by many to have broken down the
former intimate relation of employer and worker, and some scheme is
needed to correlate their interests again and to bind them together.
To secure this result profit-sharing is advocated. As defined by the
International Co-operative Congress in 1897 this is “the agreement,
freely entered into, by which the employe receives a share, fixed in
advance, of the profits.” It is not a change from the present wage
system, but simply a modification of that system according to which
the laborer receives a share in the profits in addition to his wages.
The purpose is to identify the interests of the employes with those of
their employer and thus to give him some of the same motives for
energy, care, and thrift in the conduct of the business. Three
principal methods of profit-sharing may be mentioned, though the
variations are manifold. The favorite method in England and the United
States is the payment of a cash bonus at the end of a fixed period,      111
as a year. A second plan, which is the rule in France, is a deferred
participation by means of a savings bank deposit, provident fund, or
annuity, for the purpose of providing for old age and disability. The
third plan, which has recently grown in favor in this country, is the
payment in shares of stock of the company.

The economic theory of profit-sharing is that by inducing greater care
and diligence on the part of the employe he will himself create the
fund from which he is paid. It is claimed by its advocates that it
increases both the quantity and the quality of the product and that it
promotes greater care of implements and materials, thus reducing the
cost at the same time that it increases the output. The classic
example of this is the case of the original profit-sharing scheme, the
Maison Leclaire, in Paris; the result of the first six years’
experiment was a dividend on wages of $3,753 a year, derived entirely
from the increased economy and care of the workers. In some cases,
however, the object of the employers is to secure immunity from
strikes and other labor disturbances and a greater permanence of the
labor force; and participation in profits is conditioned on the men
abstaining from joining a trade union, or on uninterrupted service. In
these cases the deferred participation plan is used. The advantages
claimed for the system are not merely the increase in product already
spoken of and the greatest efficiency of the worker, but also the
improvement in his material and moral standards, and the promotion of
industrial peace by lessening discontent and friction. The main basis
for the system, since it is economic and not philanthropic in its
nature, must of course be the increase in production brought about by
its adoption.

More weighty, however, appear the objections against profit-sharing,
which seem to have had sufficient force to cause the failure of a
number of ventures in this direction. In the first place, the            112
relation between the increased effort of a single workman and the
success of a general business is so remote, especially in our
complicated modern industry, that it is unlikely to act as a very
powerful stimulus. But even if it should, the savings thus effected
might be swept away by the poor business management of the employer.
“It is quite possible that the workman who, in the hope of earning
‘bonus to labor,’ has done work 10 per cent in excess of the normal
standard, may, even under a liberal scheme, find that, instead of
receiving an addition to his normal wages of, say, 7 per cent, the bad
management of his employer has reduced his bonus to so low a level
that he has to be content with a supplement equivalent to only 2 per
cent on his wages, or that, as has been the case in a large proportion
of the schemes … no bonus whatever is forthcoming.”[34] It is
undesirable to make the earnings of the laborer dependent in any way
upon the fluctuations of business or the ability of the employer. The
ordinary wage system has at least the merit that the reward of the
laborer is made dependent only on his own efforts. The lot of the
modern worker is too unstable and employment too unsteady to add a new
element of uncertainty in wages. If the laborer has really earned the
premium, say labor leaders, why not add it to his wages instead of
adopting this roundabout method. The sliding scale, or a system of
premiums or bonus payments for increased output, would be better than
profit-sharing, and is rapidly spreading.

This leads to the second objection, which is that profit-sharing
paralyzes the efforts of the laborers to better their own conditions
through trade unions, strikes or other methods. The trade union
attitude was vigorously stated by President Gompers of the American
Federation of Labor in his testimony before the Industrial
Commission[35]:

“There have been few, if any, of these concerns which have been even     113
comparatively fair to their employes…. They made the work harder,
longer hours, and when the employes of other concerns in the same line
of trade were enjoying increased wages, shorter hours of labor, and
other improvements, tending to the material progress of the worker,
the employes of the concern where so-called profit-sharing was the
system at the end of the year found themselves receiving lower wages
for harder work than were those who were not under that beneficent
system.” As long as the system is viewed with suspicion by the laborer
or used as a weapon in industrial bargaining by employers, the plan is
foredoomed to failure. But even were it managed in the proper spirit,
it is after all applicable to only a comparatively few industries,
those, namely, in which labor makes up the largest part of the cost of
production. In most modern industries capital plays such an important
role as compared with labor that the field for this plan is
comparatively limited.

In the actual practice of profit-sharing there have been many
interesting experiments, and not a few failures. It may be said to
date from 1842, when M. Leclaire, a Parisian painter and house
decorator, introduced it into his business, and has since spread over
France and England; it has met with little success in the rest of
Europe. In the United States the movement has also been more recent
and of smaller proportions. The reason for this is suggested by
President Hadley as follows[36]: “Where the laborers under the old
wage system are not working up to a high standard of efficiency, there
is more chance for the success of profit-sharing. This seems to be the
reason why it works better on the Continent than in England, and
better in England than in America.” It was estimated in 1900 that
there had been in the entire world some 500 experiments in
profit-sharing, of which about 400 were still in existence: a more       114
conservative estimate would place the latter number at about 300.

More radical than profit-sharing, which involves only a change in the
method of payment of wages, is co-operation, which involves a change
of management as well. Its final goal, in the minds of its advocates,
is the radical modification if not ultimate abolition of the present
wage system. While profit-sharing is paternalistic and is directed to
an increase of production, co-operation may be said to be democratic,
and to aim at a more equitable distribution. Under this plan the
laborers hope to divert to themselves the large amount of profits
which they now see going into the possession of their employers. By
eliminating the manager or enterpriser they hope to save his profits
for themselves. Two different kinds of co-operation are usually
distinguished--distributive or consumers’ co-operation, and producers’
co-operation--which we may profitably take up in turn.

Successful consumers’ co-operation may be said to have originated in
Great Britain when twenty-eight Rochdale workingmen founded their
famous society of Equitable Pioneers. The success and growth of this
remarkable experiment, starting with a capital of £28, to a great
system of 8,000 members with a capital of £200,000 in 1874, is a most
romantic story. It was largely imitated and retail co-operative stores
sprang up all over England. In 1864 the English Co-operative Wholesale
Society was started, for the purpose of the joint purchase of supplies
for the retail co-operative stores on better terms than these could
secure singly from ordinary wholesalers. It effected large economies
and was successful from the beginning; by 1901 it had a capital of
£2,500,000 and acted as purchaser for over 1,000 retail societies.
From buying, the society soon passed to making its own goods and now
manufactures directly a long list of commodities. In 1868 the Scottish
Wholesale Society was inaugurated upon practically the same plan.        115
Consumers’ co-operation has met with considerable success in Europe
also. In the United States, however, experiments of this kind have in
general had only a brief existence. It is impossible to say how many
such societies exist today as no adequate statistics on the subject
exist. Trade union stores in New England, the grange stores of the
Patrons of Husbandry and later similar ones of the Sovereigns of
Industry, and a few sporadic movements since in different parts of the
country, show what has been attempted. The reasons for the lack of
success in this country are not hard to find. Co-operation requires a
willingness to take considerable trouble for small economies, which
American workingmen, with their generally high wages, have not yet
been willing to take. It also requires a considerable degree of
homogeneity in thought and interests on the part of a people, which is
naturally less present in the United States with its large admixture
of foreign population than in England or the countries of Europe.

The methods of the Rochdale Society will serve as an illustration of
the way in which the savings effected by co-operation are distributed
among the members. Any one might become a member upon payment of one
shilling and was then entitled to trade at the store. The prices
charged were those current in the town, but purity of goods was
assured; cash payments were an essential feature. At the end of the
year the profits were divided among the members in proportion to the
amount of their purchases. On the other hand, it may be noted that no
attempt was made to, introduce profit-sharing with the employes, who
are paid ordinary but good wages only. Other forms of consumers’
co-operation are those which undertake to supply insurance, or credit,
like the co-operative insurance companies, banks, and building and
loan associations. The latter especially have had considerable success
in the United States and have helped many a laborer or man of small      116
means to the ownership of a home.

Producers’ co-operation differs from that just described in that it is
a union on the part of laborers to do away with the employer and to
secure for themselves the profits. The object of the first is to lower
prices for the co-operators as consumers; the object of the second is
rather to secure higher prices for themselves as producers by
eliminating the profits of the industrial manager. They hope to
perform his function by their collective effort, and to manage as well
as labor; indeed, by diminishing friction and strikes they even hope
to increase the profits. Examples of successful co-operation of this
sort are not numerous, as it has great difficulties to contend with.
Most of the experiments have failed, though recently it would seem
that the movement is making substantial though slow progress,
especially in France and England. Most of those in the latter country,
however, seem to be of simple industries, as agriculture and
dairy-farming. The most notable example of successful productive
co-operation in the United States has been furnished by the coopers of
Minneapolis, who organized a shop of their own in 1868 and have
steadily increased their business since that time. Other instances
often cited are the wood-workers in St. Louis and boot and shoe
companies in Massachusetts. More recently there has been a
considerable extension of co-operative creameries, cheese factories
and similar businesses of a simple kind.

The advantages of co-operation are summed up as follows by President
Walker.[37] From the laborer’s point of view: “First, to secure for
the laboring class that large amount of wealth, which … goes
annually in profits to the employer. Second, to secure for the laborer
the opportunity to produce independently of the will of an
employer…. In addition to these, the political economist beholds in
cooperation three sources of advantage. First, co-operation would,       117
by the very terms of the case, do away with strikes…. Second, the
workman would be incited to greater industry and to greater
carefulness in dealing with materials and with machinery. Third, in no
small degree frugality would be encouraged.” To these may be added
other advantages, mostly realizable, however, in consumers’
co-operation. Saving in store-room, clerk hire, advertising,
book-keeping, etc., is effected, while above all, the practice of cash
payments saves all loss from bad debts. The initial success of the
Rochdale pioneers was in large part due to the economy in this line,
as a system of long credits burdened the retail trade of England at
the time they began. In this country the large department stores have
introduced this system and have thus been able to give their customers
lower prices, and by so much have lessened the motive for consumers’
co-operation. The educative effects of successful co-operation upon
the participators in developing habits of thrift, careful management
and a knowledge of business principles, is one of the chief advantages
of the system. The ultimate ideal of enthusiastic co-operators does
not, however, stop short of a mere saving in price. The goal is stated
as follows by the Right Relationship League of America, which has
several co-operative stores in the Northwest: Consumers’ co-operation
is merely the first step which “will lead next to co-operative
production, next to public ownership of natural resources and finally
to complete industrial and economic equality, social and political
right relationship--the Kingdom of God on Earth.”

The defects of co-operation have already been suggested in the account
of their failure. In the first place, the importance and need of
intelligent and efficient management are usually underrated by
workingmen. They are unwilling to pay high salaries and as a
consequence lose the best men and secure inefficient service.
Co-operation has therefore succeeded best in retail trade where the
processes are comparatively simple, or in those branches of production   118
where industry counts for most and management for least. But even if
it were possible to secure an efficient and progressive manager for a
co-operative shop, it is found very difficult for a man chosen by the
workmen to enforce discipline among them. A second disadvantage is the
difficulty of securing capital. Where, as in many branches of
large-scale manufacturing today, the average investment of capital
amounts to more than $1,000 per employe, the impossibility of
obtaining this by the contributions of the workers is obvious. Nor are
capitalists usually willing to lend to such organizations, as the
risks are too great. To meet this difficulty Ferdinand Lassalle, a
German socialist, proposed that the state should advance the necessary
capital to associations of workmen. But the experience so far with
productive co-operation would seem to suggest that the social benefits
would not equal the waste of public capital. There is danger also that
if successful the co-operative associations would tend to become
monopolies; they are profit-seeking societies and would probably not
differ materially in their methods from ordinary joint stock
enterprises.

It seems impossible, therefore, to expect from co-operation a final
solution of the labor problem, such as John Stuart Mill, for instance,
hoped for. Where successful, it has succeeded in distributing profits
among a larger number of persons than would otherwise have received
them. Its educative and moral effects, moreover, in the appeals which
it makes to higher motives and to character, are of the highest value.
But as an industrial system of enterprise it cannot supplant the
present system as long as the manager of industry is needed. Today he
performs a useful social service and profits are his pay therefor. If
he is to be eliminated, society must first be raised to a higher plane
of efficiency, intelligence, and morality. But just because it makes
these high demands upon the members of the laboring class, attempts      119
at co-operation should receive all reasonable encouragement.




XIII. PROBLEMS OF DISTRIBUTION.


So far we have discussed for the most part those economic problems
that center round the production of wealth, such as the use of natural
resources, large-scale production, trusts and monopolies, labor
organizations, unemployment, industrial education and co-operation.
Now we shall consider briefly a few of the problems that are connected
with the distribution of wealth. Professor Blockmar[38] says that the
three great problems of economic society are: “First, how to create
the largest amount of utilities or wealth; second, how justly to
divide this amount; and third, how to make the product minister to the
permanent rather than to the transient well-being of society.” The
first problem we have already discussed; the second forms the subject
of the present section; while the third will be taken up in the next
section. Within the last century the center of interest in the
practical application of economic principles has decidedly shifted
from production to distribution. The earlier writers in economics, as
shown in the mercantile lists of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, even Adam Smith, were chiefly interested in methods of
increasing a nation’s wealth. With the introduction of the factory
system and the opening up of vast natural resources by improvements in
mining and transportation, the production of wealth has enormously
increased, and now the question of the method of its distribution or
division is felt to be more pressing.

Under the term distribution two different processes are included,
which should be distinguished before going further. The first is
called functional distribution, and concerns the distribution of the
product of industry or the income of society, among the different
factors of production. That is to say, land, labor, capital and          120
managerial ability have contributed in varying degrees to the
production of a certain amount of current wealth, and the problem of
functional distribution is to ascertain how the net product resulting
from these joint efforts is divided. How much goes to rent, how much
to wages, how much to interest and how much to profits? The second
kind of distribution is the division of the wealth of society among
individuals or families; this is personal distribution, and raises the
question of poverty and great wealth. In discussing these problems,
however, we must remember that wealth production and distribution
takes place in modern society under conditions imposed by the social
order in which we live; these were defined as competition, private
property and personal liberty. If any modifications of the processes
of distribution were desired, it would undoubtedly be necessary to
alter these fundamental institutions.

John Stuart Mill held that production was governed by natural laws,
which could be ascertained and stated, but that distribution was
artificial and hence that it was not possible to discover constant and
certain laws governing it. Beginning mainly with Mill, the ethical
question has been more and more asked as to what share each factor in
production ought to get, not merely what he does receive. “Hence the
question is rising more and more as to what should be the basis of
division, and many proposals have been made. It is proposed that
laborers combine to get a larger share. Hence we have trade unions,
Knights of Labor, etc. It is proposed that capitalists and landlords
give a larger proportion of the produce to the laborers than they are
able to secure by mere private struggle. Hence we have proposals for
profit-sharing and various charities. It is proposed that laborers
combine to be their own capitalists and landlords; hence we have all
sorts of co-operative and communistic experiments. It is asserted that
the wealthy classes have so much power in their hands that private       121
co-operation cannot succeed in competing against them, and hence it is
proposed that all the people, through government (municipal, state,
and national), secure all the means of production (capital and land,
so far at least as land is used for production), and operate them
collectively for the equitable good of all, the people thus being
their own employers, capitalists, and landlords. Hence we have
municipalism, nationalism, socialism. It is claimed that capitalists
and landlords have been able to secure, and are today able to
maintain, their large share in distribution, only through the
favoritism of the Government. Hence we have proposals for free trade,
the single tax,… the extreme proposals of the very great minimizing
of the state in individualism, or the abolition of the Government in
anarchism.”[39] In view of this very imperfect list it is not too much
to say that most of the economic problems that are stirring society
today are connected with the distribution of wealth.

The first question that suggests itself in the discussion of
functional distribution is as to whether it is actually governed by
natural law, so-called. It is observable that the amounts which go to
rent, to wages, to interest, and to profits are regularly quite
constant. What determines this? The socialists contend that natural
distribution is the only just method and insist that the state should
regulate this just distribution; they are not clear, however, as to
what this natural method is. Henry George uses the same phrase when he
says, “the just distribution of wealth is manifestly a natural
distribution of wealth, and this is that which gives to him who makes
it and secures to him who saves it.” All such statements beg the
question for they all turn on the use of the word natural. Many modern
economists are inclined to assert that the question of distribution is
not an ethical one, not a question of what ought to be but of what       122
is. Thus Professor Tetter says[40]: “Distribution in economics is the
seasoned explanation of the way in which the total product of a
society is divided among its members. It is a logical question and not
an ethical one.” And Professor Clark writes, “There is, in short, a
deep-acting natural law at work amid the confusing struggles of the
labor market.” It will not be possible, in the brief limits of this
section, to take up all the theories as to the way in which this
distribution is effected among the claimants to a share of the
product, but a few of the more important practical results may be
stated. We shall take up the four different factors in turn.

Rent is usually defined as the return for the use of natural objects
and agencies. Rent has usually been low in the United States because
of the large amount of land and other natural agents available. In
general it may be said that when any factor of production is
relatively abundant in comparison with the other factors, its share of
the product will be small.[41] Henry George, however, argues that as
the amount of land is limited and is now practically all taken up, the
future will see a constantly increasing demand for land, and hence the
landlords will absorb most of the future income of society. This is
true of most of land and other natural agents especially in demand, as
choice sites in our cities, anthracite coal mines, etc. The practical
problem that suggests itself is, do we wish private property in land?
The socialists answer no, but the individualists insist that the best
use has been and can be made of land only by reducing it to private
ownership. In practice, however, even in modern individualistic
societies, the absolute and unregulated use of land by the owner is
restricted in various ways.

Interest is the amount paid for the use of capital. From the time of     123
the church fathers in the Middle Ages down to the present-day
socialists, interest and the private ownership of productive capital
have formed favorite objects of attack. The justification of interest
lies in the fact that men prefer present goods to future goods--a bird
in the hand is worth two in the bush--and interest is the difference
in value between the two at the present moment; it is time value. The
justification of private property, on the other hand, lies rather in
its expediency than in any inherent and unalterable law of nature. It
has developed with civilization and has been, without question, a
fundamental cause of material progress. But moderate individualists
even, as John Stuart Mill, have attacked the institution of
inheritance while leaving the main edifice of private property
untouched. They would limit absolutely the amount of bequest or, as
President Roosevelt advocated, would use inheritance taxes as a means
of breaking up large fortunes.

Profits are the reward which the manager of a business receives for
his services in organizing and superintending the business. This share
of the social income was the last to be recognized by economists, and
its rightfulness is even yet denied by the socialists. They insist
that profits are really the earnings of labor which have been withheld
from the laborer by the superior skill and economic strength of the
capitalist manager; they are institutional robbery, the exploitation
of labor. It is not possible to take up the arguments on this point,
but it may be said in a word that the manager of business contributes
a needed service to the work of society just as truly as the laborer
does, and receives his earned reward in the form of profits.

Wages are the reward of labor. It is often assumed that wages are
lower than they should be, that the laborer in some way is deprived of
a portion of what he has rightfully earned. It is worth while
inquiring briefly how the share of labor in the distribution of the      124
social income is determined. Various theories have been developed to
explain the distributive process, of which we may notice three. The
oldest in point of time and the most pessimistic theory held that
wages were fixed by competition and the growth of population at the
bare subsistence minimum, a bare starvation level. If by some happy
chance wages were raised above this point, then the population would
speedily multiply and the increased competition thus brought about
among the laborers would depress wages again to the lowest amount
sufficient to support a family. Under the name of the “iron law of
wages,” this theory is still put forth by the socialists as the
explanation--together with the institution of private property--of
wages. Historically, however, this theory has happily been proven
untrue, as the advance in the standard of living among the working
class during the past century testifies. It has now been almost wholly
superseded by the so-called productivity theory,[42] which asserts
that wages depend upon the productivity of labor; that the laborer
gets what he produces, and that this share is assured him by the
working out of the competitive process under free competition. If this
theory is true, there can be no ethical question raised; if labor is
dissatisfied with its share, then it must increase its productive
efficiency. As a matter of fact wages have always been high in the
United States because labor has been relatively scarce compared with
land and capital, and consequently its marginal productivity has been
high. The third theory says that wages are a result of bargaining, of
competition in the labor market, a question of supply and demand.
Under these circumstances it is largely a question of economic
strength between labor and capital, and if labor is well-organized,
alert, and able to drive a good bargain, then wages will be high;
otherwise they will be low. While there is an element of truth in
the last theory, the second one seems the truest explanation of          125
general wages; certain it is that no monopoly power of labor, however
great, could permanently maintain wages at a level higher than the
actual produce of labor. The element of truth in the first theory is
that wages can never, for any length of time, fall below the cost of
subsistence.

Of more practical interest are questions connected with the personal
distribution of wealth. In this connection arise such problems as the
increase of large fortunes, the causes of poverty, and similar
questions. The boast of our Republic has long been that here
opportunity was open to all, that wealth was widely diffused, and that
such inequalities of fortune as characterized the nations of the Old
World were happily lacking. In the fifty-five years, 1850-1904, the
per capita value of all property in the United States exactly
quadrupled; how has this increase been distributed? Unfortunately we
have no complete statistics on this point, yet reliable estimates by
authoritative writers all tell the same story--of great concentration
of wealth in the possession of a comparatively few rich families. In
1893 Mr. George K. Holmes concluded from a study of the statistics of
farm and home ownership in the United States that “91 per cent of the
families of the country own no more than about 29 per cent of the
wealth, and 9 per cent of the families own about 71 per cent of the
wealth.” A more accurate and satisfactory statement can be drawn from
the income-tax returns for Prussia, which tells almost the same story
with regard to income. The table on the following page is condensed
from an article by Professor A. Wagner:

According to these figures over two-thirds of the persons--heads of
families or single adults--had only one-third of the income, while
3½ per cent had another third. Another striking fact shown by the
table is the large proportion of persons receiving incomes of less

  Distribution of Income in Prussia, 1902                                126

  ==============+============+============
                |  Per cent  |  Per cent
      Income    | of persons |  of income
  --------------+------------+------------
  Below $214    |    70.7    |    33.0
  $214 to $714  |    25.8    |    34.9
  Over $714     |     3.5    |    32.1
  --------------+------------+------------

than $214 a year, the minimum taxable income. It shows the poverty of
the mass of the people as well as the concentration of wealth among
the few rich. In the United States, where the natural resources have
been so much richer than in Germany, a similar table would probably
show a much smaller proportion under the Prussian minimum, but on the
other hand it would probably show a greater concentration of income in
the hands of a few. Europe has as yet no billionaire. The great
fortunes of the United States have been made possible by the unrivaled
opportunities for the exploitation of rich natural resources, the
appropriation of natural monopolies, and to special privileges and
opportunities in manufactures and transportation. The importance of
monopoly privileges in the distribution of wealth is well shown by the
results of an investigation made in 1892 by the New York Tribune into
the sources of the fortunes of millionaires. It was undertaken to show
that protection was not the main cause; but while it proved this, it
showed clearly that most of them were built up on monopoly. “Of the
4,047 millionaires reported, only 1,125, or 28 per cent, obtained
their fortunes in protected industries…. About 78 per cent of the
fortunes were derived from permanent monopoly privileges, and only 22
per cent from competitive industries unaided by natural and artificial
monopolies…. Furthermore, if the size of fortunes is taken into
account it will be found that perhaps 95 per cent of the total values
represented by these millionaire fortunes is due to those investments    127
classed as land values and natural monopolies, and to competitive
industries aided by such monopolies.”[43] It is essential to the
stability of our democratic institutions that all special privileges
be absolutely prohibited, and that monopoly be brought under strict
government control and regulation. Improper methods of wealth
accumulation should certainly be prevented.

The opposite question of poverty has already been discussed and some
of the causes of poverty pointed out. It will be sufficient here to
try to answer the question which has often been asked: Are the rich
growing richer and the poor poorer? Though the first part of the
question has just been affirmed, the second part may be denied. The
nineteenth century has witnessed a vast improvement in the condition
of the laboring man, who has shared in the increasing wealth which he
has helped to produce. Wages have steadily increased, the hours of
labor have been reduced, and the material well-being of the
wage-earner is greater today than it has ever been before. It has more
than once been pointed out by writers on this subject that with an
equal distribution of wealth no one would be well-to-do, while many
others insist that inequality in itself is a desirable thing. Greater
diffusion of wealth can come about only by very slow processes, and
permanent plenty can be secured only by a great increase in the
accumulations of capital and the efficiency of each worker. Any
suggested reform, therefore, that would weaken the motives to thrift
and industry must be rejected.




XIV. SAVING AND SPENDING.


The goal and purpose of all economic activities is the satisfaction of
human wants. The object of production is consumption. We work because
we desire and need various things which we can get only if we produce
them or earn the money to buy them. In this section we take up some      128
of the problems connected with the rational use or consumption of the
wealth which is continually being produced. We have seen something of
the conditions under which it is produced, and the manner in which it
is distributed; we must now study the not less important subject of
its application to human needs and desires. The great question is, how
can we get the largest and most rational return for a given
expenditure? Before trying to answer this question, it will be helpful
to present a summary statement of actual expenditures in different
places:

  Expenditures for Different Purposes.

  ===============+========+==========+=========+=========+=========
       Items     | United | New York |  Great  | Prussia | Average
                 | States |   City   | Britain |         |
                 |  1903  |          |         |         |
  ---------------+--------+----------+---------+---------+---------
  Food           |  43.1  |    43.4  |   51.4  |   55.0  |   48.2
  Clothing       |  13.0  |    10.6  |   18.1  |   18.0  |   14.9
  Rent           |  18.1  |    19.4  |   13.5  |   12.0  |   15.8
  Fuel and light |   5.7  |     5.1  |    3.5  |    5.0  |    4.8
  Miscellaneous  |  20.1  |    21.5  |   13.5  |   10.0  |   16.3
                 +--------+----------+---------+---------+---------
    Total        | 100.0  |   100.0  |  100.0  |  100.0  |  100.0
  ---------------+--------+----------+---------+---------+---------

From this table it is seen that practically half of the income of
average working-class families is expended for food, and five-sixths
of it goes for the bare necessaries. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that this be spent wisely. The remaining one-sixth,
included here under the head “miscellaneous,” comprises such items as
education, care of health, comfort, mental and bodily recreation, etc.
It is manifest that this group can be expanded in only one of two
ways: either by enlarging the total income, or by economizing on the
other items by a wiser and better-ordered expenditure. The former
question has already been discussed; here we are concerned only with
the latter. Dr. Frederick Engel, a Prussian statistician, laid down
certain laws with regard to consumption: as the income of a family
increases a smaller percentage is spent for food and a larger            129
percentage for education, health, recreation, etc.; while the
percentage spent for clothing, rent, fuel and light remains
approximately the same. A higher civilization and culture for the mass
of the people can only be secured by expanding the group of culture
expenditures. As long as these remain unsatisfied for the ordinary
family we cannot claim to have attained our economic goal. The author
of a recent study of conditions in New York City, where the cost of
living is high, concludes that a “fair living wage for a workingman’s
family in New York City should be at least $728 a year, or a steady
income of $14 a week.”[44] The actual earnings are certainly below
this figure.

One of the problems which has often proved very puzzling is the
relation between saving and spending. At what point should one stop
spending in order to save? If the satisfaction of our wants is the
object of production, why should we save at all? This is the point
urged by the author of a specious little book called “The Fallacy of
Saving.” The problem can be most easily solved by a more careful
analysis of terms. In the popular view, saving involves the withdrawal
of goods or money from use, while spending means putting them to
immediate use. The spendthrift is proverbially popular. “If the rich
do not spend, the poor die of hunger,” said Montesquieu. Saving may
take the form of hoarding or withdrawing things from use, but nowadays
this is practised only by misers; saving ordinarily takes the form of
investment in some productive enterprise, either directly or through a
bank. In this way a demand is created for goods just as truly as
though the money had been spent for a dinner or a suit of clothes.
Saving is spending, but it is spending for the future rather than the
present; it usually causes the production of permanent material goods
rather than transient or immaterial pleasures. Another cause of the
confusion of ideas on this subject is that we always speak of money      130
and thus lose sight of the acts of production and consumption that lie
back of the money transfer. We see that money is transferred by
spending and think that it increases trade. Consequently, when a
prodigal spends his money foolishly, it is excused on the ground that
it makes employment and puts money in circulation. We forget that it
would have been “put in circulation” just as effectively if he had not
spent it, but had placed it in a bank. If we look back of the money
transfer, we see that usually there has been a foolish or wasteful
expenditure, sometimes an absolute destruction of wealth. A fire which
burns down valuable buildings is an absolute social loss, even though
employment be given to masons and carpenters in putting them up again.

A third confusion of ideas that exists in the popular mind is due to
an over-emphasis of the desirability of work for its own sake. The man
who “makes work” is thought to be doing a desirable thing, even though
this results from the unnecessary destruction of useful things. Now
the real goal of all rational economic endeavor is not production for
its own sake, but consumption; not work, but the gratification of
wants. Every destruction of durable commodities which lessens the
power to gratify wants is a loss to a community and no juggling with
words can make it anything else. If it gives employment to labor, that
means that the labor has been diverted from the production of other
things to which it would have been devoted. Edward Atkinson several
years ago calculated that every year fires destroyed property in the
United States to the amount $150,000,000.[45] That workmen are
employed to reproduce the buildings, etc., can surely not be reckoned
as a social gain. There is great danger in a commercial age like ours
of forgetting that work is not an end in itself, but simply a means to
an end. But it may be argued that unless these men had been given        131
employment of this sort, they would have starved. It is conceivable
that during or after a revolution industry would be so interrupted
that ordinary employments would not be open. But in ordinary times
such a statement is simply an assertion of the fallacious
lump-of-labor theory, that there is just so much work to be done and
no more. New wants are continually pressing for satisfaction, waiting
only for the prior ones to be satisfied before they urge their claims.
So soon as the old ones are satisfied, additional employment is
provided in meeting the newer desires. The aim of society is to expand
continually the circle of gratified desires. As durable goods and
agents are accumulated by the process of saving, this becomes
increasingly possible in every progressive society. Useless
destruction involves sheer waste and cannot be justified on any
grounds.

On the other hand, saving is socially necessary in every industrially
developed community in order to furnish the requisite capital for the
continued production of wealth. Professor Marshall has estimated that
every year one-fifth of the wealth of a nation is used up in the
processes of manufacture and production; just to keep machines,
factories, railroads, and other instruments of production up to the
point of efficiency and restore loss and depreciation would therefore
require considerable saving. If the nation is to grow wealthier and is
to accumulate additional capital, manifestly still more must be saved.
This is done in all progressive countries. Saving is carried on by
individuals, however, and not by nations, and the motives that lead to
it are personal. The most important is probably the desire to provide
for wife and children or other relatives; next to that is the wish to
lay by sufficient for one’s old age. In our individualistic society,
where each family forms an independent unit and is assumed to be
self-supporting, it is very desirable that habits of thrift and saving
be developed. Both from a social and a personal point of view            132
therefore saving must be approved, though it is undesirable that it
should proceed so far as to prevent spending for the gratification of
essential present needs.

But what shall we say about expenditures for luxuries? Here the
spending is for the gratification of a want, though it may be out of
proportion to the results. What shall be our attitude to it? This
question is not so easy to answer as the other. Three different
schools have given as many answers to the problem of luxury: the first
condemns it utterly; the second approves it wholly; and the third
takes an intermediate position between the two extremes. Luxury is
condemned by the first school from three points of view: as a question
of individual morals, it is regarded as debasing and enervating, thus
preventing the highest development of the human faculties; as a
question of economics it is condemned as wasteful; and as a question
of right and justice it is incompatible with an equitable distribution
of wealth. It is upon this last point that the opponents of luxury lay
the greatest emphasis. As the quantity of existing wealth is
insufficient to satisfy even the primal wants of the large majority of
our fellow-creatures, we should endeavor to increase this available
store as much as we can, and should refrain from drawing upon it in a
reckless manner in order to gratify superfluous wants. Furthermore,
the productive powers that we can use are, as a matter of fact,
limited; and therefore, if the wealthy classes divert a portion of
these forces towards the production of articles of luxury, there will
be so much the less available for the production of those staple
articles that the masses require for their consumption. In the case of
a Robinson Crusoe this would be perfectly clear: if he devoted several
months to the polishing of a diamond for ornament, he would have to go
without a house or other improvements he might have made in that time.
Or, if he forced his man Friday to spend half his time polishing         133
diamonds for him, Friday might be compelled to go without sufficient
clothing or food or housing. The same thing is true of organized
society, only the truth is hidden by the phenomena of exchange. It has
been estimated[46] that the annual consumption of wealth in the United
States is divided somewhat as follows: necessaries, six billion
dollars; luxuries, three and one-half billion (of which $900,000,000
go for liquor and $500,000,000 for tobacco); capitalistic uses, three
and three-quarter billion. It is manifest that if the expenditure for
luxuries was curtailed or abandoned, there would be more to devote to
the other categories.

The opposite school replies to these arguments that luxury is an
indispensable stimulus to progress; that really all economic progress
is first manifested in the form of a need of luxury, and that luxury
therefore is a necessary phase of its development. Since luxury is
wholly relative, every want or need is, on its first appearance in the
world, regarded as superfluous; first, because no one has hitherto
wanted it, and secondly, because its production probably requires a
considerable amount of labor, on account of man’s inexperience and the
inevitable gropings in the dark that attend all beginnings. The
decencies of life today and even the necessities were once regarded as
luxuries--chimneys in houses, shoes, forks and knives, linen for the
body, bath tubs, etc. If all luxury had always been sternly suppressed
when it made its appearance, all the needs that constitute
civilization would have been nipped in the bud, and we should still be
in the condition of our ancestors of the Stone Age. Civilization
depends on the multiplication of wants. Economic progress is a process
of converting superfluities into conveniences, and conveniences into
necessities.

The attitude taken by practically all economists today is intermediate
between these two extremes. Moderate luxury is justified, but lavish     134
and indiscriminate luxury is disapproved of. This justification of
luxury rests upon purely economic grounds. In so far as personal
consumption is the objective point of production, the prohibition of
luxury would act as an impediment to enterprise. If the desire to
enjoy luxuries stimulates the productive powers of economically
important members of society, it is justifiable as a necessary motive
force. The introduction of luxuries and the consequent raising of the
standard of living seems often the only way to secure progress. If the
mass of the people live on the minimum of cheap food, multiply as long
as cheap food is to be had, and spend little for comforts and
luxuries, then most of the labor of such a community must be spent in
obtaining food for the masses. Such is the condition in India and
China. But if a large part of the community has a higher standard of
living, it will exercise self-restraint in the increase of its
numbers, and the whole level of intelligence and comfort will be
raised, as in France or Switzerland or New England. On the other hand,
it is urged that “failure on the part of any family to secure the
necessaries of life is injurious, not only to it, but to the whole
community. Under-consumption means under-nutrition and loss in
industrial efficiency. If permitted to continue it must inevitably
undermine the standards which make a family self-supporting and
self-sufficient and reduce its members to dependency. The general
interest requires, therefore, acceptance of the maxim: the consumption
of luxuries should be deferred until all are provided with
necessaries…. This suggests that no one is justified in spending
income for a luxury for himself or his family that will afford less
happiness than would the same income spent for someone else.”[47]

But the difficult question at once suggests itself: How can the
surplus incomes of the rich be used so as to provide for the needs       135
of the poor, without undermining their independence or permanently
lowering their earning power? It has been suggested that there should
be a socialization of luxury; that the rich should use their wealth
for the construction of public art galleries, libraries, parks, baths,
etc., which would thus gratify as great a number as possible. The
feeling is growing in the United States and in the world that wealth
is a social trust, and that the ownership of wealth imposes upon a
person certain moral obligations. While every man has a legal right to
spend his surplus income as he pleases, he is morally bound to spend
it in such a way as to increase the welfare of the whole community.

Let us now finally take up the problem of economy in consumption. It
is said that an American family will waste enough food for a French
family to live on. The farmer who leaves his implements out in the
rain or his cattle without proper shelter, is guilty of waste. We all
waste clothing by frequent changes in fashion. Such waste is as much
due to a lack of knowledge and training as to carelessness. The single
example of the consumption of food will illustrate this point. “If we
place the average income of an American family at $500--and it will
not greatly exceed that figure--then nearly $250 of this amount is
expended each year for food. Waste occurs in any or all of the
following ways: (1) needlessly expensive foods containing little real
nutriment are used; (2) there is a failure to select the foods best
suited to the needs of the family; (3) a great deal is thrown away
which ought to be utilized; (4) bad preparation of the food causes it
to lose much of the nutriment which it does contain; (5) badly
constructed ovens diffuse heat, instead of confining it, and cause
enormous loss of fuel. We shall state less than the truth if we
estimate that fully one-fifth of the money expended for food is
absolutely wasted, while the excessive expenditure often fails to        136
provide adequate nutrition.”[48] The remedy for such a waste as this
clearly lies in the teaching of domestic science in our public schools
to the daughters and future wives of the workingmen. As the ordinary
household expenses, as shown above, absorb from 80 to 90 per cent of
the ordinary income, the training of the housewife, under whose
control they fall, is almost as imperative as that of the wage-earner.

The economic evils of intemperance have already been partially stated
in the objections to luxury. There is, however, one additional
objection to the excessive use of intoxicating liquor which is not
true of most indulgences: it diminishes a man’s productive powers. It
is harmful in its effects upon both consumption and production. Other
items of consumption appear, however, not so clearly under the
immediate control of the consumer. The housing accommodations in many
of our large cities have often been unsanitary and unworthy of being
called homes. Legislation has been necessary to compel the erection of
better tenements and prevent the exploitation of helpless people. So
too it has been found necessary to legislate against loan-sharks, in
order to protect people against their own improvidence and ignorance.
In addition to legislation against positive evils, we must of course
look to education as the great remedy of waste in consumption.

There is one other phase of the subject of consumption that may well
be mentioned before leaving this subject. Owing to the constant
pressure of the consuming public for cheap goods, many articles are
produced under conditions dangerous to the health, morality and
well-being of the operatives, as in the case of the “sweated trades.”
To remedy these evils consumers’ leagues have been started in many
places, the members of which pledge themselves not to buy goods or to
trade in stores where the conditions of work are not up to certain
prescribed standards.

They realize that as consumers they owe a duty to other members of       137
society not to exploit them. While this method has proven a fairly
effective method of protest in some cases, it cannot be looked to as a
solution of this evil. But it emphasizes the fact that the interests
of all members of society as producers and consumers are closely
interdependent, and that the progress of society requires the
improvement of the condition of all.




XV. MONEY AND BANKING.


Probably on no subject has there been such confused thinking or have
such widely varying views been held as on that of money. There is,
however, substantial unanimity of opinion on the important points
among economists today, though in practice there still remain many
unsolved problems. The modern industrial system has already been
characterized as one of capitalistic production, of large-scale
enterprises with extended use of machinery. Not less fundamental are
the processes of valuation and exchange made possible by the use of
money and credit; and also by the machinery for the geographical
distribution of goods, our railroads and steamship lines. The modern
stage of economic development has been described by Hildebrand as one
of “credit economy,” as opposed to those of barter and money economy,
which preceded. It is inconceivable that the modern complex system of
exchange could be maintained without the extended use of money and
credit. Without attempting to define these terms or to trace their
historical development, we may proceed at once to state some of the
problems to which they have given rise.

The first question that suggests itself is, what determines the value
of money? The generally accepted answer may be briefly stated: it is,
that the value of money depends, other things remaining the same, upon
its quantity. According to the quantity theory an increase in the
supply of money will cause a fall in the value of each unit, just as     138
an increase in the supply of wheat or cotton will cause a fall in the
value of each bushel or bale. Conversely, a decrease in the quantity
of money will cause a rise in the value of money. It is simply an
application of the general law of value to money. The phrase “other
things remaining the same” is however an important one, for it assumes
that the amount of business and the methods by which it is conducted
will remain substantially unchanged. Of course if an increase in the
amount of money is accompanied by an equivalent expansion of trade,
the one may offset the other and the value of money remain unchanged.
Now, inasmuch as the prices of all goods and services are measured and
expressed in terms of money, it is clear that a fall in the value of
money means a rise of general prices; the value of each commodity is
now expressed in terms of a larger number of less valuable units or
dollars. Prices will be high if the quantity of money in circulation
in a country is large; they will be low if the quantity is small. To
the question, which is better for a country, high prices or low
prices, it may be answered that it is a matter of indifference,
provided only that there is enough money to do the work of exchange
efficiently and that fluctuations are prevented. Just how much
constitutes enough is, however, a matter of contention. In the
undeveloped sections of our country, where capital is scarce and
banking facilities undeveloped and where most of the people are
debtors, there has always been a demand for cheap and abundant money.
Capital and money have been confused and the need of one has led to a
demand for the other.

It is not a matter of indifference, however, whether prices be rising
or falling, that is, whether inflation or contraction of the currency
is taking place. A period of falling prices means hardship and
injustice to debtors and producers of goods, as farmers,
manufacturers, etc. Having contracted obligations and engaged in the     139
production of commodities with the expectation of a given price, they
find their goods worth less when ready for the market and themselves
confronted with a loss instead of the anticipated profit. Under such
circumstances a contraction of the currency and falling prices means
lessened production of wealth. Consequently many writers, and even so
good an economist as President Walker, have urged that a slow steady
inflation of the currency would promote trade and “give a fillip to
industry.” The monetary history of the United States is filled with
attempts to realize this in practice: colonial and revolutionary bills
of credit were first issued; when these were forbidden by the new
Constitution resort was had to issues by state banks. When the Federal
Government began the issue of greenbacks and restricted the use of
state bank notes, the inflationists looked to this source for
assistance. After the defeat of the Greenback party, they turned
finally to the coinage of silver, which was now falling in price, and
the question of bimetallism in the United States was made a practical
political issue.

Down to 1870 practically all the nations of Europe and America had the
system of bimetallism at ratios of 15½ or 16 to 1. About that date
the great increase in the supply of gold and the fall in the value of
silver led one country after another to abandon the latter and to
adopt the system of gold monometallism. This was vigorously resisted
by many persons and several fruitless efforts made to secure a system
of international bimetallism. Failing that, the friends of silver in
this country endeavored to secure independent action by the United
States alone, and were ultimately successful in obtaining the purchase
by the Federal Government of practically the entire silver output of
the country during the years 1878-1893.

  Development of the Manufacturing Industries in the United States,
  1800-1905.

  ======+==========+========================+===========+===========+
        |          |         Wealth.        |           |           |
        |          +---------------+--------+           |           |
  Fiscal|          |               |        |           |           |
   Year,|Population|               |        | Production| Raw wool  |
  ending| June 1.  |               |  Per   |   of      | imported. |
   June |          |     Total.    |capita. |  wool.[B] |           |
   30-- |          |               |        |           |           |
        |          |               |        |           |           |
        |          |               |        |           |           |
  ------+----------+---------------+--------+-----------+-----------+
        |          |   Dollars.    |Dollars.|  Pounds.  |  Pounds.  |
        |          |               |        |           |           |
   1800 | 5,308,483|      --       |   --   |     --    |     --    |
   1810 | 7,239,881|      --       |   --   |     --    |     --    |
   1820 | 9,638,453|      --       |   --   |     --    |     --    |
   1830 |12,866,020|      --       |   --   | 35,802,114|    669,883|
   1840 |17,069,453|      --       |   --   | 52,516,959|  9,898,740|
   1850 |23,191,876|  7,135,780,000|  307.69|     --    | 18,695,294|
   1851 |23,995,000|      --       |   --   |     --    | 32,607,315|
   1852 |24,802,000|      --       |   --   |     --    | 18,343,218|
   1853 |25,615,000|      --       |   --   |     --    | 21,616,035|
   1854 |26,433,000|      --       |   --   |     --    | 20,228,035|
   1855 |27,256,000|      --       |   --   |     --    | 18,599,784|
   1856 |28,083,000|      --       |   --   |     --    | 14,778,496|
   1857 |28,916,000|      --       |   --   |     --    | 16,505,216|
   1858 |29,758,000|      --       |   --   |     --    |     --    |
   1859 |30,596,000|      --       |   --   | 60,264,913|     --    |
   1860 |31,443,321| 16,159,616,000|  513.93| 75,000,000|     --    |
   1861 |32,064,000|      --       |   --   | 90,000,000|     --    |
   1862 |32,704,000|      --       |   --   |106,000,000| 42,131,061|
   1863 |33,365,000|      --       |   --   |123,000,000| 73,931,944|
   1864 |34,046,000|      --       |   --   |142,000,000| 90,464,002|
   1865 |34,748,000|      --       |   --   |155,000,000| 43,877,408|
   1866 |35,469,000|      --       |   --   |160,000,000| 67,918,253|
   1867 |36,211,000|      --       |   --   |168,000,000| 16,558,046|
   1868 |36,973,000|      --       |   --   |180,000,000| 24,124,803|
   1869 |37,756,000|      --       |   --   |162,000,000| 39,275,926|
   1870 |38,558,371| 30,068,518,000|  779.83|160,000,000| 49,230,199|
   1871 |39,555,000|      --       |   --   |150,000,000| 68,058,028|
   1872 |40,596,000|      --       |   --   |158,000,000|122,256,499|
   1873 |41,677,000|      --       |   --   |170,000,000| 85,496,049|
   1874 |42,796,000|      --       |   --   |181,000,000| 42,939,541|
   1875 |43,951,000|      --       |   --   |192,000,000| 54,901,760|
   1876 |45,137,000|      --       |   --   |200,000,000| 44,642,836|
   1877 |46,353,000|      --       |   --   |208,250,000| 42,171,192|
   1878 |47,598,000|      --       |   --   |211,000,000| 48,449,079|
   1879 |48,866,000|      --       |   --   |232,500,000| 39,005,155|
   1880 |50,155,783| 43,642,000,000|  850.20|240,000,000|128,131,747|
   1881 |51,316,000|      --       |   --   |272,000,000| 55,964,236|
   1882 |52,495,000|      --       |   --   |290,000,000| 67,861,744|
   1883 |53,693,000|      --       |   --   |300,000,000| 70,575,478|
   1884 |54,911,000|      --       |   --   |308,000,000| 78,350,651|
   1885 |56,148,000|      --       |   --   |302,000,000| 70,596,170|
   1886 |57,404,000|      --       |   --   |285,000,000|129,084,958|
   1887 |58,680,000|      --       |   --   |269,000,000|114,038,030|
   1888 |59,974,000|      --       |   --   |265,000,000|113,558,753|
   1889 |61,289,000|      --       |   --   |276,000,000|126,487,729|
   1890 |62,622,250| 65,037,091,000|1,038.57|285,000,000|105,431,285|
   1891 |63,844,000|      --       |   --   |294,000,000|129,303,648|
   1892 |65,086,000|      --       |   --   |303,153,000|148,670,652|
   1893 |66,349,000|      --       |   --   |298,057,384|172,433,838|
   1894 |67,632,000|      --       |   --   |309,748,000| 55,152,585|
   1895 |68,934,000| 77,000,000,000|1,117.01|272,474,708|206,033,906|
   1896 |70,254,000|      --       |   --   |259,153,251|230,911,473|
   1897 |71,592,000|      --       |   --   |266,720,684|350,852,026|
   1898 |72,947,000|      --       |   --   |272,191,330|132,795,202|
   1899 |74,318,000|      --       |   --   |288,636,621| 76,736,209|
   1900 |76,303,387| 88,517,306,775|1,164.79|302,502,328|155,928,455|
   1901 |79,003,000|      --       |   --   |287,450,000|166,576,966|
   1903 |80,372,000|      --       |   --   |291,783,032|177,137,796|
   1904 |81,752,000|107,104,211,917|1,310.11|295,488,438|173,742,834|
   1905 |83,143,000|      --       |   --   |298,915,130|249,135,746|
   1906 |84,216,433|      --       |   --   |298,294,750|201,688,668|
   1907 |85,817,239|      --       |   --   |311,138,321|203,847,545|
   1908 |87,189,392|      --       |   --   |     --    |125,980,524|
  ------+----------+---------------+--------+-----------+-----------+

  ======+==========+=====================================================+
        |          |               Manufactures of cotton.               |
        |Production+--------------------------+--------------------------+
  Fiscal|    of    | Thousands of spindles in |  Thousands of bales of   |
   Year,|cotton.[B]| operation on Sept. 1st.  |  domestic cotton taken   |
  ending|          |                          |        by mills.         |
   June | (500-lb. +--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
   30-- |  bales,  |   In   |   In   |  Total |   In   |   In   |  Total |
        |  gross   |Southern|Northern| United |Southern|Northern| United |
        | weight.) |States. | States.| States.| States.| States.| States |
  ------+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
        |  Number. | Thou-  | Thou-  | Thou-  | Thou-  | Thou-  | Thou-  |
        |          | sands. | sands. | sands. | sands. | sands. | sands. |
   1800 |    73,222|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |
   1810 |   177,824|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |
   1820 |   334,728|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |        |
   1830 |   732,218|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |
   1840 | 1,347,640|    181 |  2,104 |  2,285 |     71 |    166 |    237 |
   1850 | 2,136,083|    265 |  3,733 |  3,998 |     78 |    497 |    575 |
   1851 | 2,799,290|   --   |   --   |   --   |     60 |    404 |    464 |
   1852 | 3,130,338|   --   |   --   |   --   |    111 |    588 |    699 |
   1853 | 2,766,194|   --   |   --   |   --   |    153 |    650 |    803 |
   1854 | 2,708,082|   --   |   --   |   --   |    145 |    592 |    737 |
   1855 | 3,220,782|   --   |   --   |   --   |    135 |    571 |    706 |
   1856 | 3,873,680|   --   |   --   |   --   |    138 |    633 |    771 |
   1857 | 3,012,016|   --   |   --   |   --   |    154 |    666 |    820 |
   1858 | 3,758,273|   --   |   --   |   --   |    143 |    452 |    595 |
   1859 | 4,309,642|   --   |   --   |   --   |    167 |    760 |    927 |
   1860 | 3,841,416|    324 |  4,912 |  5,236 |     94 |    751 |    845 |
   1861 | 4,490,586|   --   |   --   |   --   |    153 |    650 |    803 |
   1862 | 1,596,653|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |
   1863 |   449,059|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |
   1864 |   229,372|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |
   1865 | 2,093,658|   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |   --   |
   1866 | 1,948,077|   --   |   --   |   --   |    127 |    541 |    668 |
   1867 | 2,345,610|   --   |   --   |   --   |    150 |    573 |    723 |
   1868 | 2,198,141|   --   |   --   |   --   |    168 |    800 |    968 |
   1869 | 2,409,597|   --   |   --   |   --   |    173 |    822 |    995 |
   1870 | 4,024,527|    328 |  6,804 |  7,132 |     69 |    728 |    797 |
   1871 | 2,756,564|   --   |   --   |   --   |     91 |  1,072 |  1,163 |
   1872 | 3,650,932|   --   |   --   |   --   |    120 |    977 |  1,097 |
   1873 | 3,873,750|   --   |   --   |   --   |    138 |  1,063 |  1,201 |
   1874 | 3,528,276|   --   |   --   |   --   |    128 |  1,192 |  1,320 |
   1875 | 4,302,818|   --   |   --   |   --   |    130 |  1,071 |  1,201 |
   1876 | 4,118,390|   --   |   --   |   --   |    134 |  1,220 |  1,354 |
   1877 | 4,494,224|   --   |   --   |   --   |    127 |  1,302 |  1,429 |
   1878 | 4,745,078|   --   |   --   |   --   |    151 |  1,345 |  1,496 |
   1879 | 5,466,387|   --   |   --   |   --   |    186 |  1,375 |  1,561 |
   1880 | 6,356,998|    561 | 10,092 | 10,653 |    189 |  1,382 |  1,570 |
   1881 | 5,136,447|   --   |   --   |   --   |    225 |  1,713 |  1,938 |
   1882 | 6,833,442|   --   |   --   |   --   |    287 |  1,677 |  1,964 |
   1883 | 5,521,963|    860 | 11,800 | 12,660 |    313 |  1,759 |  2,072 |
   1884 | 5,477,448|  1,050 | 12,250 | 13,300 |    340 |  1,537 |  1,877 |
   1885 | 6,369,341|  1,125 | 12,250 | 13,375 |    316 |  1,437 |  1,753 |
   1886 | 6,314,561|  1,150 | 12,250 | 13,400 |    381 |  1,781 |  2,162 |
   1887 | 6,884,667|  1,200 | 12,300 | 13,500 |    401 |  1,687 |  2,088 |
   1888 | 6,923,775|  1,250 | 12,300 | 13,550 |    456 |  1,805 |  2,261 |
   1889 | 7,472,511|  1,360 | 12,700 | 14,060 |    480 |  1,790 |  2,270 |
   1890 | 8,562,089|  1,570 | 12,814 | 14,384 |    539 |  1,979 |  2,518 |
   1891 | 8,940,867|  1,740 | 12,900 | 14,640 |    613 |  2,027 |  2,640 |
   1892 | 6,658,313|  1,950 | 13,250 | 15,200 |    684 |  2,172 |  2,856 |
   1893 | 7,433,056|  2,100 | 13,450 | 15,550 |    723 |  1,652 |  2,375 |
   1894 |10,025,534|  2,200 | 13,500 | 15,700 |    711 |  1,580 |  2,291 |
   1895 | 7,146,772|  2,400 | 13,700 | 16,100 |    852 |  2,019 |  2,871 |
   1896 | 8,515,640|  2,850 | 13,800 | 16,650 |    900 |  1,605 |  2,505 |
   1897 |10,985,040|  3,250 | 13,900 | 17,150 |    999 |  1,793 |  2,792 |
   1898 |11,435,368|  3,550 | 13,900 | 17,450 |  1,254 |  2,211 |  3,465 |
   1899 | 9,459,935|  3,950 | 14,150 | 18,100 |  1,415 |  2,217 |  3,632 |
   1900 |10,266,527|  4,368 | 15,104 | 19,472 |  1,523 |  2,350 |  3,873 |
   1901 | 9,675,771|  5,500 | 11,700 | 20,200 |  1,583 |  1,964 |  3,547 |
   1902 |10,827,168|  6,400 | 15,000 | 21,400 |  2,017 |  2,066 |  4,083 |
   1903 |10,045,615|  6,900 | 15,100 | 22,000 |  1,958 |  1,966 |  3,924 |
   1904 |13,679,954|  7,650 | 15,200 | 22,850 |  1,889 |  2,046 |  3,935 |
   1905 |10,804,556|  7,631 | 16,056 | 23,687 |  2,140 |  2,139 |  4,279 |
   1906 |13,595,498|  8,995 | 16,255 | 25,250 |  2,373 |  2,536 |  4,909 |
   1907 |11,375,461|  9,528 | 16,847 | 26,275 |  2,411 |  2,574 |  4,985 |
   1908 |13,587,306| 10,201 | 17,304 | 27,505 |  2,187 |  2,352 |  4,539 |
  ------+----------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+

  ======+===========+===========+===========+============
        |           |           |           |
        |           |           |           |
  Fiscal|           |           |  Unmanu-  |
   Year,|           |           |  factured |  Imports
  ending|  Exports. |  Imports. |    silk   |  of crude
   June | (domestic)|           | imported. |  rubber.
   30-- |           |           |           |
        |           |           |           |
        |           |           |           |
  ------+-----------+-----------+-----------+------------
        |  Dollars. |  Dollars. |  Pounds.  |   Pounds.
        |           |           |           |
   1800 |     --    |     --    |    --     |     --
   1810 |     --    |     --    |    --     |     --
   1820 |     --    |  7,812,326|    --     |     --
   1830 |  1,318,183|  5,774,013|    --     |     --
   1840 |  3,549,607|  6,504,104|    --     |     --
   1850 |  4,734,424| 20,781,346|    --     |     --
   1851 |  7,241,205| 22,164,442|    --     |     --
   1852 |  7,672,151| 19,689,496|    --     |     --
   1853 |  8,768,894| 27,731,363|    --     |     --
   1854 |  5,535,516| 33,949,503|    --     |     --
   1855 |  5,857,181| 17,757,112|    --     |     --
   1856 |  6,967,309| 25,917,999|    --     |     --
   1857 |  6,115,177| 28,685,726|    --     |     --
   1858 |  5,651,504| 18,584,810|    --     |     --
   1859 |  8,316,222| 26,976,381|    --     |     --
   1860 | 10,934,796| 33,215,541|    --     |     --
   1861 |  7,957,038| 25,271,382|    --     |     --
   1862 |  2,946,464|  8,890,119|    --     |  2,125,561
   1863 |  2,906,411| 14,121,589|    --     |  5,104,650
   1864 |  1,456,901| 14,341,501|    407,935|     --
   1865 |  3,451,561|  9,223,686|    288,286|     --
   1866 |  1,780,175| 27,502,194|    567,904|     --
   1867 |  4,608,235| 19,302,005|    491,983|     --
   1868 |  4,871,054| 17,335,406|    512,449|  8,438,019
   1869 |  5,874,222| 20,481,312|    720,045|  7,813,134
   1870 |  3,787,282| 23,380,053|    583,589|  9,624,098
   1871 |  3,558,236| 29,876,640|  1,100,281| 11,031,939
   1872 |  2,304,330| 35,307,447|  1,063,809| 11,803,437
   1873 |  2,947,528| 35,201,324|  1,159,420| 14,536,978
   1874 |  3,095,840| 28,193,869|    794,837| 14,191,320
   1875 |  4,071,882| 27,738,401|  1,101,681| 12,035,909
   1876 |  7,722,978| 22,725,598|  1,354,991| 10,589,297
   1877 | 10,235,843| 18,923,614|  1,186,170| 13,821,109
   1878 | 11,438,660| 19,081,037|  1,182,750| 12,512,203
   1879 | 10,853,950| 19,928,310|  1,889,776| 14,878,584
   1880 |  9,981,418| 29,929,366|  2,562,236| 16,826,099
   1881 | 13,571,387| 31,219,329|  2,790,413| 20,015,176
   1882 | 13,222,979| 35,719,791|  3,549,404| 22,712,862
   1883 | 12,951,145| 38,036,044|  4,731,106| 21,646,320
   1884 | 11,885,211| 29,074,626|  4,284,888| 24,574,025
   1885 | 11,836,591| 27,197,241|  4,308,908| 24,208,148
   1886 | 13,959,934| 29,709,266|  6,818,060| 29,263,632
   1887 | 14,929,342| 28,940,353|  6,028,091| 28,649,446
   1888 | 13,013,189| 28,917,799|  6,370,322| 36,628,351
   1889 | 10,212,644| 26,805,942|  6,645,124| 32,339,503
   1890 |  9,999,277| 29,918,055|  7,510,440| 33,842,374
   1891 | 13,604,857| 29,712,624|  6,266,629| 33,712,089
   1892 | 13,226,277| 28,323,841|  8,834,049| 39,976,205
   1893 | 11,809,355| 33,560,293|  8,497,477| 41,547,680
   1894 | 14,340,886| 22,346,547|  5,902,485| 33,757,783
   1895 | 13,789,810| 33,196,625|  9,316,460| 39,741,607
   1896 | 16,837,396| 32,437,504|  9,363,987| 36,774,460
   1897 | 21,037,678| 34,429,363|  7,993,444| 35,574,449
   1898 | 17,024,092| 27,267,300| 12,087,951| 46,055,497
   1899 | 23,566,914| 32,054,434| 11,250,383| 51,063,066
   1900 | 24,003,087| 41,296,239| 13,073,718| 49,377,138
   1901 | 20,272,418| 40,246,935| 10,405,555| 55,275,529
   1902 | 32,108,362| 44,460,126| 14,234,826| 50,413,481
   1903 | 32,216,304| 52,462,755| 15,270,859| 55,010,571
   1904 | 22,403,713| 49,524,246| 16,722,709| 59,015,551
   1905 | 49,666,080| 48,919,936| 22,357,307| 67,234,256
   1906 | 52,944,033| 63,043,322| 17,352,021| 57,844,345
   1907 | 32,305,412| 73,704,636| 18,743,904| 76,963,838
   1908 | 25,177,758| 68,379,781| 16,662,132| 62,233,160
  ------+-----------+-----------+-----------+------------

  [B] Calendar years.

  Development of the Manufacturing Industries in the United States,
  1800-1905--Continued.

  =====+=======================+============+
       |                       |            |
       |     Production of     | Exports of |
       |                       |  domestic  |
       +------------+----------+  copper &  +
  Year.|            |          |  manufac-  |
       |  Coal.[C]  |Copper.[C]|    tures   |
       |            |          |    of.     |
       |            |          |            |
       |            |          |            |
  -----+------------+----------+------------+
       |    Long    |   Long   |  Dollars.  |
       |    tons.   |   tons.  |            |
       |            |          |            |
   1800|     --     |     --   |      --    |
   1810|          20|     --   |      17,426|
   1820|       3,080|     --   |      18,547|
   1830|     285,779|     --   |      36,601|
   1840|   1,848,249|      100 |      86,954|
   1850|   6,266,233|      650 |     105,060|
   1851|   7,798,683|      900 |      91,871|
   1852|   8,764,879|    1,100 |     103,039|
   1853|   9,437,757|    2,000 |     108,205|
   1854|  10,698,841|    2,250 |      91,984|
   1855|  11,541,672|    3,000 |     690,766|
   1856|  12,095,469|    4,000 |     534,846|
   1857|  11,910,883|    4,800 |     607,054|
   1858|  12,477,213|    5,500 |   1,985,223|
   1859|  13,958,192|    6,300 |   1,048,246|
   1860|  13,044,680|    7,200 |   1,664,122|
   1861|  14,721,439|    7,500 |   2,375,029|
   1862|  15,612,353|    9,000 |   1,098,546|
   1863|  19,034,877|    8,500 |   1,026,038|
   1864|  21,076,003|    8,000 |     251,272|
   1865|  21,243,012|    8,500 |     991,746|
   1866|  25,896,056|    8,900 |     143,761|
   1867|  27,432,520|   10,000 |     474,110|
   1868|  29,341,036|   11,600 |     479,488|
   1869|  29,378,893|   12,500 |     355,274|
   1870|  29,496,054|   12,600 |     504,741|
   1871|  41,861,679|   13,000 |     188,218|
   1872|  45,940,535|   12,500 |     185,983|
   1873|  51,430,786|   15,500 |      88,711|
   1874|  46,969,571|   17,500 |     356,758|
   1875|  46,739,571|   18,000 |   1,085,688|
   1876|  47,571,429|   19,000 |   3,441,939|
   1877|  54,019,429|   21,000 |   2,913,943|
   1878|  51,728,214|   21,500 |   2,319,901|
   1879|  60,808,749|   23,000 |   2,831,053|
   1880|  63,822,830|   27,000 |     793,455|
   1881|  76,679,491|   32,000 |     824,896|
   1882|  92,456,419|   40,467 |     658,941|
   1883| 103,310,290|   51,574 |   1,404,243|
   1884| 107,281,742|   64,708 |   2,664,964|
   1885|  99,250,263|   74,052 |   5,447,423|
   1886| 101,500,381|   70,430 |   2,602,869|
   1887| 116,652,242|   81,017 |   2,033,523|
   1888| 132,731,837|  101,054 |   3,812,798|
   1889| 126,097,779|  101,239 |   2,348,954|
   1890| 140,866,931|  115,966 |   2,349,392|
   1891| 150,505,954|  126,839 |   4,614,597|
   1892| 160,115,242|  154,018 |   7,226,392|
   1893| 162,814,977|  147,033 |   4,525,573|
   1894| 152,447,791|  158,120 |  19,697,140|
   1895| 172,426,366|  169,917 |  14,468,703|
   1896| 171,416,390|  205,384 |  19,720,104|
   1897| 178,776,070|  220,571 |  31,621,125|
   1898| 196,407,381|  235,050 |  32,180,872|
   1899| 226,554,636|  253,870 |  35,983,529|
   1900| 240,789,310|  270,588 |  57,852,960|
   1901| 261,874,836|  268,782 |  43,267,021|
   1902| 269,277,178|  294,423 |  41,218,373|
   1903| 319,068,229|  311,627 |  39,667,196|
   1904| 314,121,784|  362,739 |  57,142,081|
   1905| 350,820,840|  402,637 |  86,225,291|
   1906| 369,783,284|  409,735 |  81,282,664|
   1907| 428,895,914|  387,945 |  94,762,110|
   1908|     --     |    --    | 104,064,580|
  -----+------------+----------+------------+

  =====+===========================================+======================+
       |                                           |                      |
       |                Production of              |   Iron and steel     +
       |                                           |    Manufactures.     |
       +----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
  Year.|          |          |          |          |          |           |
       | Natural  |   Iron   |   Pig    | Steel.[C]| Imports. | Exports   |
       | gas.[C]  |  ore.[C] | iron.[C] |          |          | (domestic)|
       |          |          |          |          |          |           |
       |          |          |          |          |          |           |
  -----+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
       | Dollars. |Long tons.|Long tons.|Long tons.| Dollars. |  Dollars. |
       |          |          |          |          |          |           |
       |          |          |          |          |          |           |
   1800|    --    |    --    |    --    |    --    |    --    |     52,144|
   1810|    --    |    --    |    53,908|    --    |    --    |     91,914|
   1820|    --    |    --    |    20,000|    --    |    --    |     46,552|
   1830|    --    |    --    |   165,000|    --    | 6,346,287|    322,747|
   1840|    --    |    --    |   286,903|    --    | 8,157,923|  1,127,877|
   1850|    --    |    --    |   563,755|    --    |20,145,067|  1,953,702|
   1851|    --    |    --    |    --    |    --    |22,439,297|  2,336,587|
   1852|    --    |    --    |    --    |    --    |23,568,649|  2,368,384|
   1853|    --    |    --    |    --    |    --    |34,944,002|  2,541,554|
   1854|    --    |    --    |   657,338|    --    |35,456,143|  4,249,959|
   1855|    --    |    --    |   700,159|    --    |28,693,979|  3,803,706|
   1856|    --    |    --    |   788,515|    --    |29,050,101|  4,256,613|
   1857|    --    |    --    |   712,640|    --    |30,743,649|  4,959,238|
   1858|    --    |    --    |   629,548|    --    |20,171,007|  4,843,592|
   1859|    --    |    --    |   750,560|    --    |22,379,743|  5,577,748|
   1860|    --    |    --    |   821,223|    --    |26,158,235|  5,870,114|
   1861|    --    |    --    |   653,164|    --    |21,160,235|  6,039,149|
   1862|    --    |    --    |   703,270|    --    |11,451,707|  4,732,348|
   1863|    --    |    --    |   846,075|    --    |16,152,843|  6,681,417|
   1864|    --    |    --    | 1,014,282|    --    |23,822,876|  7,541,967|
   1865|    --    |    --    |   831,770|    --    |16,660,991| 11,227,294|
   1866|    --    |    --    | 1,205,663|    --    |25,598,147|  4,006,180|
   1867|    --    |    --    | 1,305,023|    19,643|31,630,519|  9,351,062|
   1868|    --    |    --    | 1,431,250|    26,786|30,346,768| 10,950,275|
   1869|    --    |    --    | 1,711,287|    31,250|38,213,717| 10,938,492|
   1870|    --    | 3,031,891| 1,665,179|    68,750|40,273,682| 13,483,163|
   1871|    --    |    --    | 1,706,793|    73,214|53,024,075| 21,189,692|
   1872|    --    |    --    | 2,548,713|   142,954|67,852,616| 11,463,880|
   1873|    --    |    --    | 2,560,963|   198,796|74,302,102| 13,655,087|
   1874|    --    |    --    | 2,401,262|   215,727|46,786,469| 15,098,248|
   1875|    --    |    --    | 2,023,733|   389,799|31,432,380| 19,534,215|
   1876|    --    |    --    | 1,868,961|   533,191|23,197,417| 15,449,846|
   1877|    --    |    --    | 2,066,594|   569,618|19,320,927| 16,501,638|
   1878|    --    |    --    | 2,301,215|   731,977|18,987,130| 16,053,571|
   1879|    --    |    --    | 2,741,853|   935,273|19,594,608| 15,133,493|
   1880|    --    | 7,120,362| 3,835,191| 1,247,335|71,266,699| 14,716,524|
   1881|    --    |    --    | 4,144,254| 1,588,314|60,604,477| 16,608,767|
   1882|   215,000|    --    | 4,623,323| 1,736,692|67,976,897| 20,748,206|
   1883|   475,000|    --    | 4,595,510| 1,673,535|58,495,246| 22,826,528|
   1884| 1,460,000|    --    | 4,097,868| 1,550,879|40,147,053| 21,909,881|
   1885| 4,857,200|    --    | 4,044,526| 1,711,920|33,610,093| 16,592,155|
   1886|10,012,000|    --    | 5,683,329| 2,562,503|37,534,078| 15,745,569|
   1887|15,817,500|    --    | 6,417,148| 3,339,071|49,203,164| 15,958,502|
   1888|22,629,875|    --    | 6,489,738| 2,899,440|48,992,757| 17,763,034|
   1889|21,097,099|14,518,041| 7,603,642| 3,385,732|42,377,793| 21,156,077|
   1890|18,792,725|16,036,043| 9,202,703| 4,277,071|41,679,591| 25,542,208|
   1891|15,500,084|14,591,178| 8,279,876| 3,904,240|53,544,372| 28,909,614|
   1892|14,870,714|16,296,666| 9,157,000| 4,927,581|28,928,103| 28,800,930|
   1893|14,346,250|11,587,629| 7,124,502| 4,019,995|34,937,974| 30,106,482|
   1894|13,954,400|11,879,679| 6,657,888| 4,412,032|20,925,769| 29,220,264|
   1895|13,006,650|15,957,614| 9,446,308| 6,114,834|23,048,515| 32,000,989|
   1896|13,002,512|16,005,449| 8,623,127| 5,281,689|25,338,103| 41,160,877|
   1897|13,826,422|17,518,046| 9,652,680| 7,156,957|16,094,557| 57,497,872|
   1898|15,296,813|19,433,716|11,773,934| 8,932,857|12,626,431| 70,406,885|
   1899|20,074,873|24,683,173|13,620,703|10,639,857|12,100,440| 93,716,031|
   1900|23,698,674|27,553,161|13,789,242|10,188,329|20,478,728|121,913,548|
   1901|27,066,077|28,887,479|15,878,354|13,473,595|17,874,789|117,319,320|
   1902|30,867,863|35,554,135|17,821,307|14,947,250|27,180,247| 98,552,562|
   1903|35,807,860|35,019,308|18,009,252|14,534,978|51,617,312| 96,642,467|
   1904|38,496,760|27,644,330|16,497,033|13,859,887|27,028,312|111,948,586|
   1905|41,562,855|42,526,133|22,992,380|20,023,947|23,510,164|134,728,363|
   1906|46,873,932|47,749,728|25,307,191|23,398,136|29,053,987|160,984,985|
   1907|52,866,835|51,720,619|25,781,361|23,362,594|40,587,865|181,530,871|
   1908|    --    |    --    |15,936,018|    --    |27,607,909|183,982,182|
  -----+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+

  =====+========================================+===========
       |      Prices of staple commodities.     |
       +-------------------+---------+----------+   Washed
       |    Per ton.[C]    |         |          |Ohio fleece
       |---------+---------+ Middling| Standard | wool, per
  Year.|         | Steel   | cotton, |sheetings,| lb., in
       | Pig iron| rails,  |   per   |  per     | eastern
       |  No. 1, |standard |pound.[C]| yard.[C] |  m’k’ts,
       | foundry.|sections.|         |          |  July 1.
       |         |         |         |          |  Medium.
  -----+---------+---------+---------+----------+-----------
       | Dollars.| Dollars.|  Cents. |  Cents.  |    Cents.
       |         |         |         |          |
       |         |         |         |          |
   1800|    --   |    --   |   --    |    --    |      --
   1810|    --   |    --   |   --    |    --    |      --
   1820|    --   |    --   |   --    |    --    |      --
   1830|    --   |    --   |   --    |    --    |      50
   1840|  27.88  |    --   |   --    |    --    |      39
   1850|  20.88  |    --   |  12.34  |    7.87  |      37
   1851|  21.38  |    --   |  12.14  |    7.08  |      42
   1852|  22.63  |    --   |   9.50  |    6.96  |      38
   1853|  36.13  |    --   |  11.02  |    7.92  |      53
   1854|  36.88  |    --   |  10.97  |    7.96  |      37
   1855|  27.75  |    --   |  10.39  |    7.64  |      40
   1856|  27.18  |    --   |  10.30  |    7.50  |      42
   1857|  26.34  |    --   |  13.51  |    8.90  |      50
   1858|  22.19  |    --   |  12.23  |    8.25  |      37
   1859|  23.33  |    --   |  12.08  |    8.50  |      40
   1860|  22.70  |    --   |  11.00  |    8.73  |      50
   1861|  20.26  |    --   |  13.01  |   10.00  |      30
   1862|  23.92  |    --   |  31.29  |   18.55  |      47
   1863|  35.24  |    --   |  67.21  |   36.04  |      70
   1864|  59.22  |    --   | 101.50  |   52.07  |     100
   1865|  46.08  |    --   |  83.38  |   38.04  |      73
   1866|  46.84  |    --   |  43.20  |   24.31  |      67
   1867|  44.08  |  166.00 |  31.59  |   18.28  |      49
   1868|  39.25  |  158.46 |  24.85  |   16.79  |      45
   1869|  40.61  |  132.19 |  29.01  |   16.19  |      48
   1870|  33.23  |  106.79 |  23.98  |   14.58  |      45
   1871|  35.08  |  102.52 |  16.95  |   13.00  |      60
   1872|  48.94  |  111.94 |  22.19  |   14.27  |      70
   1873|  42.79  |  120.58 |  20.14  |   13.31  |      48
   1874|  30.19  |   94.28 |  17.95  |   11.42  |      53
   1875|  25.53  |   68.75 |  15.46  |   10.41  |      49
   1876|  22.19  |   59.25 |  12.98  |    8.85  |      35
   1877|  18.92  |   45.58 |  11.82  |    8.46  |      44
   1878|  17.67  |   42.21 |  11.22  |    7.80  |      36
   1879|  21.72  |   48.21 |  10.84  |    7.97  |      38
   1880|  28.48  |   67.52 |  11.51  |    8.51  |      48
   1881|  25.17  |   61.08 |  12.03  |    8.51  |      44
   1882|  25.77  |   48.50 |  11.56  |    8.45  |      45
   1883|  22.42  |   37.75 |  11.88  |    8.32  |      41
   1884|  19.81  |   30.75 |  10.88  |    7.28  |      34
   1885|  17.99  |   28.52 |  10.45  |    6.75  |      31
   1886|  18.71  |   34.52 |   9.28  |    6.75  |      33
   1887|  20.93  |   37.08 |  10.21  |    7.15  |      37
   1888|  18.88  |   29.83 |  10.03  |    7.00  |      39
   1889|  17.76  |   29.25 |  10.65  |    7.00  |      39
   1890|  18.41  |   31.78 |  11.07  |    7.00  |      37
   1891|  17.52  |   29.92 |   8.60  |    6.83  |      35
   1892|  15.75  |   30.00 |   7.71  |    6.50  |      34
   1893|  14.52  |   28.12 |   8.56  |    5.90  |      26
   1894|  12.66  |   24.00 |   6.94  |    5.11  |      21
   1895|  13.10  |   24.33 |   7.44  |    5.74  |      21
   1896|  12.95  |   28.00 |   7.93  |    5.45  |      18
   1897|  12.10  |   18.75 |   7.00  |    4.73  |      23½
   1898|  11.66  |   17.62 |   5.94  |    4.20  |      29
   1899|  19.36  |   28.12 |   6.88  |    5.28  |      31½
   1900|  19.98  |   32.29 |   9.25  |    6.05  |      31½
   1901|  15.87  |   27.33 |   8.75  |    5.54  |      26
   1902|  22.19  |   28.00 |   9.00  |    5.48  |      26¾
   1903|  19.92  |   28.00 |  11.18  |    6.25  |      31½
   1904|  15.57  |   28.00 |  11.75  |    7.13  |      32½
   1905|  17.88  |   28.00 |   9.80  |    7.00  |      39
   1906|  20.98  |   28.00 |  11.50  |    7.25  |      37
   1907|  23.89  |   28.00 |  12.10  |    7.62  |      36
   1908|  17.70  |   28.00 |  10.62  |    6.75  |      38
  -----+---------+---------+---------+----------+-----------

  [C] Calendar year.

The arguments in favor of bimetallism are as various as the motives of
its advocates, but two or three of the more important ones may be        140
briefly stated. It is urged because it would give a more stable
measure of value than either silver or gold alone could do; and the
evil effects of fluctuations in the value of gold since 1873 are
pointed out to illustrate this contention. Monometallists answer this
by asserting that most of the price changes can be accounted for by
improvements in production; that even if they were caused by a
contraction of the currency, this was simply one of the risks of
business; and finally, that the evil effects of falling prices are
offset by a corresponding reduction in interest rates. A second
argument of the bimetallists was the alleged insufficiency of gold on
which to do the world’s business. As this has been practically met by
the phenomenal increase in gold production in the last decade,
especially since the gold discoveries in Alaska, it is not necessary
to dwell upon this argument. On February 1, 1909, the per capita
circulation of money in the United States reached $35.00, the highest
point in our history. A final argument of the bimetallists concerns
foreign trade: it would facilitate this by establishing a fixed
par-of-exchange between all countries. While the weight of this may be
admitted, it has been practically deprived of all force by the
adoption of the gold standard by virtually all the industrially
developed nations of the world. This last fact shows that the question
has now been actually settled by the logic of events and today the
issue of bimetallism has only an academic interest.

Another problem connected with money which has been removed from the
arena of oratory to that of calm discussion is that of government
paper money. It is urged, with much truth, that if a nation issued
paper money instead of gold or silver, it would save all the expense
of mining these metals. It would resemble, as Adam Smith said, the
discovery of wagon roads through the air in the realm of
transportation. Another argument advanced in favor of government paper
money is that it would be possible by a scientific adjustment of the     141
issues to regulate the amount of money in circulation and so to
prevent all fluctuations in prices. Both contraction and inflation
would be prevented and a cheap and yet ideal system of money would
exist. Still others see in this form of money an instrument for the
creation of wealth; this last argument simply results from a confusion
of ideas and need not be dealt with. A sufficient answer to the other
two is an appeal to the lesson of history: no government which has
embarked upon the issue of paper money has ever been able to restrict
the issues within reasonable limits; often it has led to national
bankruptcy and the repudiation of the entire issues. The experience of
the United States with the greenbacks has been more fortunate than
that of many countries, but does not tempt to further experiment.

The monetary situation in the United States today may be regarded as
fairly well settled. Although we have a very heterogeneous assortment
of different kinds of money, a fairly distinct sphere is allotted to
each, and as the basis for all, the gold standard has been definitely
established by law. Money of large denominations consists of gold and
gold certificates (lowest denomination, $20), of greenbacks and
national bank notes (lowest denomination, $10, though one-third of
bank notes may be $5); the needs of retail trade are met by the issue
of silver certificates and silver dollars, and of fractional currency.
The system would be much simplified by the retirement and destruction
of the $346,000,000 in greenbacks, but as there is now a fifty-per
cent reserve in gold back of them, little danger need be apprehended
from their presence. Many people have regarded the existence of some
$500,000,000 worth of silver dollars as a menace to the goodness of
our money supply, but as the amount of gold in circulation increases
the silver will form a constantly smaller percentage of the whole. It
is a cumbersome and not very valuable asset of the Government, but       142
is now almost powerless for good or ill.

Important as is the subject of money and essential as is the need of a
standard of undoubted goodness, it is overshadowed in practical
significance by the problems of banking and credit. An investigation
by the Comptroller of the Currency some years ago showed that over 90
per cent of the receipts of the national banks consisted of credit
instruments, while probably 60 per cent of the trade of the country
was carried on by credit rather than by cash transactions. A credit
transaction is a transfer of goods or money for a future equivalent;
the element of time is introduced. This makes possible an enormous
increase in the number of exchanges and obviates the necessity, to a
large extent, of using money. Most of us enjoy personal credit, which
is limited only by our ability to persuade other people to trust in
us. But this power of purchasing things without immediate payment must
be made readily available if the ordinary business man is to make use
of it. This is done through the medium of a bank, whose business it is
to discount the notes of its customers, which in turn is based upon
confidence in their prospective earnings. The bank credit thus
obtained may be transferred by means of checks to other persons and to
other banks. It is the most fluid and volatile means of payment yet
devised, and is subject to dangers and abuses. In the last analysis
business based upon such a system of credit rests upon confidence in
the honesty of individuals and in the enforcement of the law governing
contracts, and also in the ability of those who have pledged
themselves to future payment to make good their obligations. In times
of panic credit fails and resort is had to money.

The fundamental institution in our credit economy is the bank, and it
is therefore essential that it be thoroughly safe and responsive to
the needs of the business world. A bank may furnish its customers        143
with the ready means of payment they need in exchange for their future
promises either in the form of bank notes or bank credit. The former
are more largely used on the continent of Europe and in rural
districts in this country, the latter by England and the United
States, especially in the cities. The preference for one or the other
seems to be a matter of geography. The issue of bank notes has been
very carefully safeguarded since the establishment of the national
banking system in 1863. They are based upon the purchase of government
bonds and are absolutely safe. They lack, however, one essential
quality of good bank money in that they are quite inelastic. That is
to say, the amount of bank notes in circulation does not vary
according to the needs of business, increasing to meet an increased
demand, and then declining again when the demand has passed. Being
based upon government bonds and not upon the value of business assets,
they vary in amount only with the price of the former and not at all
with the volume of the latter.

The main practical problem connected with our banking system is,
therefore, to find some other basis for the issue of bank notes,
especially as it is not desirable to maintain a permanent bonded
indebtedness solely for this purpose. Various suggestions have been
made, as the establishment of a central bank with sole power of issue,
like the government banks in European countries. This is a favorite
proposal with the big bankers, but is unlikely to be adopted as it is
directly contrary to the spirit of the existing system. The Canadian
system is held up as a model, with its system of branch banking and 5
per cent safety fund for the redemption of the notes of failed banks.
Curiously enough this was copied after the system in operation in New
York State, which was nipped in the bud by some early mistakes and by
the development of the national banking system. It works admirably in
Canada and is well worth careful study. The plan of asset currency       144
is another suggestion, according to which bank notes should be issued
up to a certain percentage of the resources of the bank, but without
pledging any specific property for their redemption as is done in the
case of the national banks at present. It has finally been urged that
our present bond deposit system should be modified by substituting
state, municipal, railroad, or industrial bonds for those of the
Federal Government, but that in other respects the system should be
left intact. We may look for legislation along one or another of these
lines in the next few years, as the subject is an urgent one whose
solution cannot long be postponed.

Another problem is connected with the money reserves that the banks
are required by law to keep on hand in order to meet demand
liabilities. Under the national system in the United States the
country banks may deposit three-fifths of their lawful reserves with
banks in reserve cities, and these banks in turn may deposit one-half
of their reserves in banks in central reserve cities (New York,
Chicago, and St. Louis). Thus there is a massing, under this system,
of the bank reserves of the country in the city of New York, and
within that city in some twenty banks. While there is great economy in
such a system the concentration of reserves is certainly attended by
great dangers, not the least of which is its use by speculative
influences in the New York money market, as a great part of it is
loaned out to speculators on call.

Still another practical problem connected with the monetary and
banking system of the United States is that of the independent
treasury system. The Federal Government is to a large extent its own
banker; it collects, disburses its revenue and keeps its money in its
own vaults; it even, as we have seen, issues paper money and keeps a
reserve therefor. By its action in withdrawing large amounts of money
from use, or on the other hand making large disbursements, it can and    145
does affect the money market vitally and sometimes disastrously. While
it is permitted to deposit funds in selected national banks and has
recently made increasing use of this privilege, thus correlating in a
measure the reserves of the Government and the needs of the business
community, it is held by most students that the independent treasury
system should be abolished, and that the banks should act as the
intermediaries between the Government and the people in the collection
and expenditure of its funds.

So far we have been discussing commercial banks, but there is another
kind of institution which goes by the same name but serves quite a
different purpose, namely, the savings bank. The essential and almost
the only requirement of such an institution is safety. As we have
seen, it is not only desirable for personal reasons to inculcate
habits of saving and thrift in individuals, but it is also necessary
to secure the accumulation of capital needed in modern industry. It is
therefore important that such institutions should be widespread,
accessible, and thoroughly trusted. These requirements seem to be best
fulfilled by the postal savings banks in England and elsewhere, which
have led to a great increase in savings on the part of the people. The
introduction of such a system in the United States is greatly to be
desired.




XVI. TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION.


Almost as important for the conduct of modern industry as machine
methods and credit are the rapid means of transportation and
communication furnished by our railroad, steamship, express, post
office, telegraph and telephone systems. Indeed the development of
industry on a national scale and its integration under centralized
control has been made possible only by these improvements. But not
only have these businesses rendered the centralization of industry
possible; they themselves exhibit on a national scale concentration      146
of control. They are all industries of increasing returns and lend
themselves naturally to monopolistic control. At the very beginning of
railroad construction one of the most far-sighted managers enunciated
the doctrine that “where combination is possible competition is
impossible.” For years competition was regarded as the regulator of
rates, pooling between railroads was forbidden, canals were advocated
as competitors, and by every possible device it was sought to
stimulate it. We are at last beginning to recognize the monopoly
character of the railroad industry and to regulate it accordingly.

Consolidation in the railroad world is not a new phenomenon nor is it
confined to that industry, but it has proceeded further there than in
any other line of business. The first form which combination took was
that of pooling, according to which the traffic was “pooled” and the
earnings then divided among the companies entering into the pool
according to some previous agreement. This was forbidden by the
Interstate Commerce Act in 1887 and even more stringently by the
Anti-Trust Act of 1890, and accordingly railroad managers next
resorted to actual consolidation of competing lines. Where this has
not been possible or desirable, virtual combination has been secured
by the so-called “community of interests” arrangements, based on the
acquisition by one road of enough stock in competing lines to secure
representation on their boards of directors. Today some eight or nine
groups of capitalists control over two-thirds of the railway mileage
of the United States, and according to a recent widely-published
statement the late Mr. E. H. Harriman was credited with controlling,
directly or indirectly, a system aggregating over 67,000 miles. These
great consolidations have followed mainly the territorial groupings of
railroads; the United States has now been districted out by a few
large transportation companies, much as France, Italy, England and
other European countries had previously been divided up. Consolidation   147
has in many instances resulted in increased convenience to the public
and in economies in management and operation, but it places a
dangerous amount of power in the hands of a few men, which has not
infrequently been abused, and should clearly be under strict
government control.

The primary economic problem connected with railways is always the
question of rates. This has been called in a recent book “the heart of
the railroad problem.” The first fact that strikes the student of the
subject is the great reduction in rates and fares in the past
twenty-five years, especially in freight rates. From 1.24 cents in
1882 the average revenue per ton mile received by railroads in the
United States has decreased to .748 cents in 1906. Freight rates,
especially through rates for bulky traffic, are considerably lower in
this country, and passenger fares somewhat higher, than in Europe. But
the vital problem connected with rates is not as to their relative
cheapness or extortionateness; it concerns rather the granting of
discriminating rates. Discriminations may be of three kinds: those
between different classes of goods, those between localities, and
those between persons. The first group is based upon the
classification of freight and rests upon differences in cost of
shipment, in bulk, in risk, etc. If reasonably employed, this kind of
discrimination is justifiable. Local discriminations, that is,
charging different rates to different localities for substantially the
same service, is not only unwarranted in most cases, but is
short-sighted as well. Where superior facilities or especially keen
competition exists, lower rates may be permitted for favored
localities, but the arbitrary exercise of such powers by railway
officials is thoroughly unjustifiable. Even less defensible is the
practice, now happily less frequent, of granting discriminatory rates
to favored individuals or corporations. They have been given by means    148
of secret rates and rebates, by under-billing and under-classification,
by free passes, etc. Both of these latter evils have been forbidden or
greatly restricted by the passage of the Interstate Commerce Act in
1887 and subsequent legislation.

The public nature of railroads is now fairly well recognized in our
law and is beginning to be understood by the people at large.
Railroads enjoy peculiar privileges in the grant of corporate
franchises and charters, in the right of eminent domain, and in
enormous grants of land and money which have been made to them in this
country. Moreover in the functions they perform the social character
of their duties is emphasized, and they are under the necessity of
maintaining a constant service open to all. Though they are owned by
private investors and managed as private enterprises, they are
essentially public enterprises as to their privileges, functions, and
duties. Consequently most of the states have now undertaken, through
commissions, to regulate the railroads in the public interest. Some
thirty-one have appointed commissions, which probably control
four-fifths of the traffic originating and ending in a single state.
These state commissions differ in power, those of the Mississippi
Valley and the South usually having mandatory powers, that is, power
to prescribe and enforce maximum rates. In the eastern and central
states commissions with supervisory powers merely, of investigation
and report, have been created. The only exceptions are found in the
Far West where the need of improved transportation facilities is more
pressing than regulation, and in five eastern states whose
legislatures are controlled by the railroad interests. While the state
commissions have done and are doing valuable service, it is clear that
the growth of giant railroad combinations which traverse several
states necessitates federal control. The appointment of the Interstate
Commerce Commission in 1887 established the principle of federal
regulation, but the application of the principle in active practice has  149
been slow and has been impeded by the courts. The final control of
rates has not yet been given to the Commission.

Owing to the individualistic character of our institutions and law,
public ownership of railroads does not exist in the United States,
which thus forms, together with England, almost the sole important
exception to the world’s practice in this regard. On the continent of
Europe government ownership is the rule. Public control through either
ownership or regulation by commission is essential to secure an
equitable adjustment of public and private rights and to prevent the
abuse of monopoly power inherent in the very nature of railroads.
Public ownership has many advantages and has given satisfactory
results in Europe. But for the United States the principle of private
ownership with stricter governmental regulation has been definitely
laid down; the problem of the future is simply how far that control
shall go.

The discussion of our steam railroads does not exhaust the subject of
transportation. A recent and important development is the growth of
electric interurban railways, which are opening up districts untouched
by the more expensive steam roads and exercising a marked influence in
rural districts upon business and social life. A more significant
problem, both because of its close relations to the railroads and its
monopoly character, is offered by the express companies. Organized at
a time when railroads were new and undeveloped they took over the safe
and expeditious delivery of small and valuable articles. They have
since grown in importance and power; six large companies now control
over 90 per cent of the business. Since they are generally in the form
of partnerships and not of corporations it has not been possible to
bring them under legal control, and their rates are extremely
high--three or four times as much as freight rates. In some cases the
railroads, in order to gain the profits from these high rates, have
themselves organized express companies to operate over their lines,      150
immune from interference by the Interstate Commerce Commission. Even
where that is not done, the express companies are performing a service
which could as well be performed by the railroads themselves and at
lower rates. These facts have lent great strength to the demand for
the establishment by the Federal Government in connection with the
post office of a parcels post, such as exists in England and in most
European countries. By the extension of the maximum limit of mail
packages to ten or fifteen pounds the usefulness of the post office
could be immensely increased without any loss in rates. So far,
however, the express companies have been strong enough to resist the
introduction of this reform, though it is warmly advocated by the
present Postmaster-General. A recent important improvement in our
postal service has been the extension of rural free delivery to the
farming districts, thereby breaking down to a great extent the
isolation of country districts. This and the rural telephone have been
of great social value.

The importance of the telephone and telegraph in our modern industrial
life cannot be overestimated. As means of transmitting intelligence
they have served to bring the most distant parts of the world into
almost instant touch, and have made possible the modern centralization
of business. Both offer the same problems of monopoly that we have
seen exist in other parts of this field, the telegraph business being
completely monopolized by two large companies, the telephone business
by one, all strongly entrenched behind patents. The desirability of
public ownership of these utilities rests upon stronger grounds than
in the case of railroads and is strongly urged by many conservative
writers.

Although attention has usually been centered upon the railroads in any
discussion of the transportation question in the United States, there
are important practical problems connected with both the inland and      151
the ocean water transportation. The questions of constructing
artificial inland waterways and of subsidizing our foreign merchant
marine are vital political and industrial issues. The United States is
probably better provided with internal navigable natural waterways
than any other country. Her navigable rivers comprise some 18,000
miles. Affording access to the very heart of the continent both from
the Atlantic coast and from the Gulf. They form a cheap and convenient
means of transportation, especially for bulky and cheap articles;
30,000,000 tons a year are carried on the streams of the Mississippi
Valley alone, though much of the former traffic has been diverted to
the railroads. On the northern border of the country the Great Lakes
form an unrivaled series of inland seas. The traffic on these shows a
great increase every year, amounting now to over 60,000,000 tons
annually. The Federal Government has performed useful service in
improving the conditions of navigation along these natural waterways,
and is now considering a comprehensive scheme for their further
improvement.

A very different problem is offered by our canal system. During the
period 1820-1840 many canals were constructed by the states to connect
existing waterways and provide an outlet for produce from the
interior. The best examples of these were the Erie and the Ohio
canals. After the development of the railway, however, traffic began
to be steadily and then rapidly diverted from the canals to these
quicker avenues of transportation. Many of the canals were bought up
by their rivals and permitted to fall into disuse, while those
retained by the state governments remained mere shallow ditches,
unimproved and ill-adapted to modern needs. The recent appropriation
by the people of New York State of over $100,000,000 for the
improvement of the Erie Canal, and the construction of the Panama
Canal by the Federal Government have brought the question of the         152
rehabilitation of our neglected canal system to the front again. It
seems wasteful not to connect the separate links in the magnificent
system of natural waterways already provided by nature, and this will
probably be the first step taken. And indeed a beginning has already
been made by the construction of the Hennepin Canal, the Des Plaines
Canal, and others, and a company has been formed to connect Pittsburg
with Lake Erie and to cut through Cape Cod. It must, however, be borne
in mind that there are two distinct types of canal: those which are
simply short connecting links between navigable waterways and which
permit the passage of vessels used on those waters; and those canals
which are shallow, have extensive lockage, and permit the use of only
small boats, thus necessitating the transshipment of freight. One
might well advocate the construction and enlargement of the first
type, and yet hesitate to approve of the second. As yet, however,
owing in part to the opposition and clamor of railroad interests, the
question of canals has not received the attention it deserves in the
United States.

The ocean merchant marine comprises two widely different branches, the
coastwise and the foreign trade. The former is open only to vessels
flying the American flag, and has shown a very steady growth;
five-sixths of our ocean merchant marine today is engaged in this
branch of commerce. Coal, lumber, cotton, and similar bulky
commodities constitute the chief items entering into the coastwise
trade. The tonnage of American vessels engaged in the foreign trade,
on the other hand, has shown a steady decline ever since the outbreak
of the Civil War. Foreign vessels today carry fully 90 per cent of the
foreign commerce of the United States. The causes of this decline are
economic rather than political, for American legislation has on the
whole been very liberal to the shipping interests. At the time the
western part of our country began to be opened up and its great
resources exploited, our merchant marine was one of the best in the      153
world. But now the other opportunities for the investment of capital
were so profitable and alluring, and the need of it so great, that all
the available labor and capital of the American people began to be
devoted to the development of their internal resources. A nation
cannot do everything with equal advantage at the same time any more
than an individual can. Accordingly we began to withdraw our capital
from shipping and devote it to agriculture, mining, manufacturing,
transportation, and similar more profitable enterprises. Foreigners
could build vessels and run them more cheaply than we could and it
paid us to hire them to do it. Recently, however, and especially since
the recent awakening of a national consciousness after the
Spanish-American War, the patriotism of many individuals has been hurt
by the thought that we had to depend upon foreign vessels for the
carriage of our foreign commerce, while in the minds of others a
comprehensive naval program demanded the building up of a native
merchant marine. Two questions suggest themselves here: Do we wish to
stimulate this growth artificially? And, if we do, what means shall we
adopt? On the second point the Merchant Marine Commission of 1904
recommended for the United States a general bounty on all shipping,
such as France has, and the subvention of certain lines of steamers
over ten specified routes, following the example of Great Britain,
Germany, and Japan. Without committing ourselves on this point, it may
be suggested that on political, geographical, and economic grounds we
may expect in the near future to see the natural development of an
American merchant marine. With the growth of our foreign trade, the
accumulation of capital at home, and the building up of a strong navy,
the conditions for American shipbuilding and shipping will become
steadily more favorable, and we may expect to see American enterprise
engage in this as in other lines of industry. Eventually we are          154
destined to become a maritime nation.




XVII. TAXATION AND TARIFF.


In no way does the State affect the interests of its citizens more
vitally than in the sphere of taxation. The State in modern society is
the people organized for certain collective purposes, as for the
public defense, the preservation of domestic peace, and the
furtherance of the social and industrial welfare. To carry out these
objects money is needed and the State has therefore to collect from
its citizens sufficient revenue to defray its expenditures. John Fiske
has tersely defined taxes as “portions of private property taken for
public purposes.” Taxation thus implies a certain degree of
compulsion; by it the Government interferes with the free choice of
the individual and expends a part at least of his income for him in
ways that he himself might not have chosen. The social and industrial
consequences of a system of taxation may also be far-reaching and
important. As Professor R. T. Ely says: “Taxation may create
monopolies, or it may prevent them; it may diffuse wealth, or it may
control it; it may promote labor or equality of rights, or it may tend
to the establishment of tyranny and despotism; it may be used to bring
about reform, or it may be used to aggravate existing grievances and
foster dissensions between classes.” It is evident therefore that the
utmost care should be exercised in framing a system of taxation.

Certain canons or rules of taxation were laid down by Adam Smith over
a hundred years ago and have been generally endorsed by economists
ever since. One was that taxes ought to be certain and not arbitrary,
as to amount, time and manner of payment; another was that taxes ought
to be levied in the manner most convenient to the tax-payer; and a
third, that taxes ought to take as little as possible out of the
pockets of the tax-payer over and above what is paid into the public     155
treasury. These three maxims--certainty, convenience, and
economy--have been generally accepted, but less general agreement
exists in regard to the fourth, which states that the subjects of
every state ought to contribute to the support of the Government as
nearly as possible in proportion to their respective abilities. This
rule has given rise to two problems: first, is ability the most just
basis of taxation; and secondly, if so, how is ability to be measured?
The theory of justice generally accepted by legal writers and by the
American courts is expressed in the maxim that taxes should be
proportioned to benefits received. The benefit theory affords a good
rule in the assessment of local property taxes, but fails utterly in
the domain of national and state affairs. Who can measure the benefits
to each individual of an appropriation for a new war ship or for a
state penitentiary or for the public school system? Probably the
benefits are in inverse proportion to the income or wealth of the
individual, and the heaviest taxes would then have to be apportioned
to those least able to pay. Most economists today agree that taxes
should be apportioned according to “faculty” or ability to pay. It
satisfies better our sense of fairness and is more readily applicable
than the benefit theory. In the last analysis, of course, it may be
said that taxation in general must confer real benefits upon society
or it will not be tolerated. Here, however, we are concerned with a
rule of apportionment.

The second practical problem encountered is when we attempt to apply
the faculty principle in practice; how is ability to be measured?
Three measures have been suggested: expenditure, income, and property.
Expenditure is open to the objection that it would place an unduly
large proportion of the tax burdens on the poor, whose expenditures
are larger in proportion to their means than those of other classes of
society. Property is objected to because large classes of society,       156
including professional men with large incomes, would then escape
taxation largely or altogether. Income on the surface seems the
fairest measure of ability, but is objected to because the incomes of
different individuals, both on account of source and size, really
indicate unequal and not similar abilities. In practice, however, all
three methods are employed in all advanced states, so it is not
necessary to decide which is theoretically the fairest.

Still another practical question confronts us after we adopt the
ability theory: Shall the rate of taxation be the same no matter what
the amount of the property or income, or shall it increase as the
amount grows larger? In other words, shall taxation be proportional or
progressive? In general the advocates of the ability theory also
support progression, though there are many exceptions to this
statement. Three main arguments have been urged in support of this
method. First, progression is advocated in order to secure equality of
sacrifice; it is argued that each dollar of a $10,000 income affords
less gratification to the owner than each dollar of a $1,000 income,
and that consequently in order to equalize the sacrifices of the two
individuals a larger proportion of the first income should be taken
than of the second. Objection is made to this, that wants expand even
more rapidly than incomes and therefore the initial assumption is
untrue. Progression is urged, in the second place, by those who desire
to use taxation as a method of introducing social reforms or of
bringing about a more equitable distribution of wealth, as by the
breaking up of large fortunes. It seems inadvisable, however, to use
the machinery of taxation for such purposes. Other writers urge that
the ability to earn or produce wealth increases at an accelerating
rate, and that taxation should therefore keep pace with it. “It is the
first thousand that counts.” The objection is made here that it would
penalize ability and energy. In general, while the arguments are not     157
conclusive, progression certainly secures a nearer approach to the
ideal of the ability theory than does proportional taxation. The
practical application, after we accept it, is still a difficult
matter. It should be applied to the revenue system as a whole by the
careful selection of special taxes. As a matter of fact we have just
the opposite system in the United States, for the poor man undoubtedly
pays out a larger proportion of his income in taxes--principally on
articles of consumption--than do his wealthy neighbors.

In the main there has been a clear division in the United States
between the sources of income of the Federal Government on the one
hand and those of the state and local governments on the other. The
Federal Treasury has derived its revenue almost entirely from indirect
taxes--excise and customs--while the other governments have depended
chiefly upon direct taxes upon persons, property, business,
corporations, and inheritances. The division rests upon the
constitutional allotment of powers, but it also corresponds very
closely to the industrial and political functions of each in their
relations to the individual citizens. The chief duty of the Federal
Government is that of national defense and foreign intercourse,
relations which are national in extent but which affect the individual
only remotely; so, too, its taxing area is national and its exactions
are felt only distantly. Few persons, it has been said, taste the tax
in their tea or their whisky, yet over one-third of all the taxes
collected in the United States are derived from either customs or
excise duties. Whisky and tobacco contribute most of the internal
revenue, while import duties are levied on practically everything
brought into the country which could compete with any home product.
These two sources yield over $500,000,000 a year to the Federal
Treasury. During the Civil War these sources of revenue were
supplemented by a federal income tax, but as such a tax was later
declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, further recourse to      158
this in the near future seems improbable. From a purely economic and
financial point of view this is very regrettable, for the Federal
Government should unquestionably have at its command the means of
quickly raising large additional revenue with as little disturbance to
industry as possible. Such a means would be afforded by the income
tax, which moreover can be administered only by the Federal
Government, as it must be national in its operations to be fair.

The main reliance of the state and local governments in this country
is the general property tax, which amounted in 1902 to over
$700,000,000 or almost half of all the taxes collected. This really
consists of two very distinct parts, which present quite different
problems, namely, the tax on real property and that on personal
property. Under our peculiar system, by which property is assessed
locally, and upon the basis of that assessment its share of the state
taxes distributed to each locality, there is every incentive offered
to the local assessor to under-value the land in his jurisdiction,
thereby escaping part of the state burdens. This evil of inequality
between localities could be obviated by the simple expedient of
relieving real estate of all state taxes and leaving it solely to the
counties and cities for purposes of taxation. In the case of personal
property the great evil is evasion. Much of our modern wealth exists
in the form of securities, stocks, bonds, mortgages, etc., and this is
practically undiscoverable by assessors except by the voluntary
declaration of the tax-payer, which is only truthfully made by
trustees and a few conscientious persons. Most of our laws have been
directed to the discovery of this intangible property, as it is
called, but without avail. In a few of the most progressive states the
effort has at last been recognized as futile, and the attempt is now
being made to reach these sources of income indirectly, by taxes on
corporations, on business, franchises and other tangible evidences of
wealth.

Not only are corporation, business, license and similar taxes being      159
developed, but increasing resort is had to inheritance taxes, over
thirty states now making use of this form of taxation. They are more
frequently imposed on collateral than direct inheritances, and in many
states are progressive, both as to amount and as to nearness of
relationship. Thus in Wisconsin the rates advance from one per cent
for bequests under $25,000 to husband, wife, or lineal relation, to 15
per cent for sums over $500,000 to very distant relatives or
strangers. These various forms of taxation are necessary to secure the
needed revenues for the state governments, especially if these forego
further resort to taxation of realty. The tendency is now sufficiently
marked to make it possible to indicate with some certainty the future
of taxation in this country. To a certain extent, however, this must
be regarded as the expression of an ideal rather than the description
of an existing system. The Federal Government should have customs and
excise duties, supplemented by an income tax. The state governments
should have corporation and inheritance taxes. The cities and minor
civil divisions should have taxes on realty, and license and franchise
taxes. Such a division is logical and avoids duplication of taxation
of the same source by two or more grades of government. In view of the
pre-emption of the field of corporation taxation by the states, it is
therefore doubly regrettable that the Federal Government should now
(August, 1909) have adopted a tax on income of corporations for
federal purposes.

Other problems connected with finance are suggested in connection with
the universal tendency to increase in governmental expenditures and in
public debts. The former is an expression of the growth and expansion
of state functions, which will be discussed in the next section. The
latter is due in part to this same fact, in part also to the
development of credit and the creation of a market for the sale of       160
public and other securities, and finally to the growth of
constitutional government, which has made the people willing to
entrust their capital to a government which they themselves as
citizens really control.

The question of the tariff involves such important economic as well as
financial consideration that it seems best to discuss this form of
taxation somewhat more fully. For it has been used not merely as a
means of raising revenue but also as an instrument to develop
particular industries and prevent foreign competition. Any detailed
discussion of this subject therefore involves a statement of the pros
and cons of protection and free trade. It should be said, however, in
advance that the real issue is not free trade, for that is demanded by
only a few doctrinaires, but freer trade through an intelligent
revision of the tariff downward. The system of protection has
prevailed in the United States for virtually one hundred years, and
could not be suddenly changed and abolished if one would. From the
financial standpoint, too, import duties are absolutely essential to
the support of our Federal Government; the question here is not
absolutely free trade, but the choice of articles for revenue
purposes. Shall they be those which are not produced in this country
or those which enter into competition with domestic products? If
financial considerations alone prevailed, the former would undoubtedly
be selected as the more convenient, certain, and economical. But in
the determination of the tariff policies of the United States economic
considerations have been paramount and to an examination of these we
must now turn.

Historically the following arguments have played the main role in
support of protection at different times in the United States. The
infant industries argument was advanced by Hamilton in his celebrated
Report on Manufactures in 1791 and has always been important until
recently when the infants had grown to be so lusty that it was evident
that other reasons for protecting them must be discovered. This was      161
found in the plea for diversified production, which was necessary for
a well-rounded economic development; the need of creating a strong
national government and national spirit also played their part. In
order to win over the farmers the home market argument was early
urged; this has taken various forms. In the first place it was urged
that the building up of manufacturing centers and the consequent
increase in population would give the farmers a better market than the
fluctuating foreign one. As set forth by Carey, it would keep within
the country the elements taken from the soil. It would also save the
freights on the transportation of goods back and forth across the
ocean. Each of these arguments has lost force with the development of
the country and the decrease in the cost of transportation. More
important today is the wages argument; at first protection was urged
because wages were high in the United States and the manufacturer
needed to be protected against his foreign competitor who employed
cheap labor. Today it is argued that protection has raised wages and
must be continued in order to protect the laborer against the pauper
labor of Europe. Curiously enough, in France protection is urged for
French workmen against the highly paid and efficient American. The
effect of the tariff on wages has been greatly exaggerated; wages are
high in the United States because the productivity of labor is high.
Indeed so far as the tariff raises prices it may be argued that the
real wages of labor are lowered. More generally accepted as defensible
grounds for protection are the political arguments that a nation
should be able to produce its own military armaments and supplies, and
that it should be able to use the tariff as a retaliatory measure.
Recently this latter has received considerable force from the practice
of “dumping,” by which is meant the occasional sale of products abroad
at prices lower than those charged at home. Domestic manufacturers in
the country thus treated are of course seriously injured and have        162
insisted upon protection against this procedure which has been
authorized in Canada.

In answer to these various arguments the free traders, or those
desiring a modification of present high rates, make their main appeal
to the doctrine of comparative costs. Briefly stated this asserts that
nations, like individuals, can do some things better than others. Like
the individual lawyer therefore who pays to have his boots blacked
while he devotes himself to the law, the nation should produce the
things it is best fitted for and pay others to produce other things
which it can do less well. In this way each will obtain the largest
possible return. Protection, which interferes with this natural
international division of labor, simply diverts labor and capital from
more into less profitable industries. Practically, this purely
abstract economic argument has had little influence on the commercial
policy of nations, which have been moved more by political and
industrial considerations. Today, however, there is no question but
that the freer movement of capital and industry throughout the world
would be advantageous. In answer to the home market argument it is
pointed out that with the growth of large-scale production the
profitable area of manufacture has greatly widened and now in many
cases transcends national boundaries. As home producers seek foreign
markets, as they are beginning to do, they themselves will demand a
reduction of the tariff, especially in the matter of raw materials.
Free traders also deny the need of artificially diversifying industry
in a country as large and varied as the United States, or of building
up infant industries. Indeed, on the latter point, they urge that many
of our trusts are the result of the tariff, and that the attempt to
grant legislative favors has resulted only in wholesale demoralization
and a debauching of our national politics.

In conclusion it may be said that under certain conditions the           163
policy of protection is relatively defensible; that it has undoubtedly
hastened the industrial development of the United States, though it
has not caused it; and that, on the other hand, it is responsible for
not a few evils in our political and industrial life. The struggle of
particular interests during the framing of the Payne bill shows the
impossibility of deciding this issue upon academic grounds. It may be
prophesied, however, that as our manufacturers reach out more
seriously after the foreign markets the tariff will be modified so as
to make this possible; but he would be a rash prophet who should
predict a sudden or great change in our tariff policy within the
present generation.




XVIII. THE FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT.


In the course of the preceding pages we have repeatedly referred to
the necessity or desirability of governmental action, and have
emphasized the important part which it plays in our economic life
today. Every practical economic problem that confronts us calls in
some degree for the exercise of state activity. It is necessary for us
then, if we are to render sound judgment on these questions, to have a
clear opinion as to the proper sphere of government action, as to how
far the State should interfere in the economic activities of private
individuals. We cannot do better than to state first the main
functions of a modern state. The modern industrial system, as we saw
in the first section, is based upon certain fundamental
institutions--personal liberty, competition, and private property. The
first function of government is to guarantee to every individual the
rights of freedom, property, and contract; this involves the
maintenance of peace and order. These are often spoken of as “natural
rights”; rather they are rational rights, based upon expediency and
human welfare, and are created and maintained by society. Without the
constant support and intervention of government they would possess       164
little reality or significance. But in addition to guaranteeing these
fundamental institutions, modern governments grant individuals certain
privileges, as patents, copyrights, trade-marks, franchises, etc.,
designed to stimulate the economic activity of individuals.

A second group of functions undertaken by the modern state is
regulative. As we have seen, laws are made regulating the freedom of
contract, the conditions of labor, the conduct of business, methods of
banking and transportation, etc. The terms under which competitive
business may be conducted are laid down, and while freedom of industry
prevails for every individual it is only on condition that he conforms
to the rules of the game thus prescribed. But the conditions are not
merely restrictive; sometimes they are designed to promote enterprise,
as in the case of gifts, subsidies, protective duties, etc. In all
these ways the State interferes with the action of perfectly free
competition for the purpose of securing better or more equitable
conditions. A third group of functions embraces the direct
participation in industry by the Government itself, as the
post-office, gas, electric, and water works, canals, roads, sewers,
parks, etc. In other countries, when the functions of government are
more extended than in the United States, it conducts railroads,
telegraph and telephone systems, tenements, pawn shops, theaters,
industrial insurance, or various other activities. The line which
divides public from private enterprise varies greatly in different
countries.

This raises the general question, how far is it desirable that the
economic functions of government should extend? As to the necessity of
state activity in some form there can be no doubt. Production,
exchange, distribution, and to a smaller extent consumption, are all
social processes; they concern the whole of society, and must be
brought under social control. Montesquieu laid down the proposition
in the middle of the eighteenth century that taxes invariably            165
increase with the growth of liberty. Historically this has been
verified: the development of freedom in government and industry has
meant the realization of self-restraint by the imposition of
regulative law. But the modern State has gone further than this: it
has realized the necessity of taking an active part in modern
industrial life, for the equalization of the terms of competition, the
redress of grievances, and the furnishing of utilities, either because
it could do it better or because it was the only agency capable of
acting. The standpoint of this treatise has been one of moderate
individualism, believing in free competition and individual
initiative, but not frightened off by the bogey of socialism, if at
any point the interference of government seemed desirable or
necessary. To present the matter clearly it will be well to state
briefly the main theories that have been held as to the proper
function of government, arranging them in their logical, though not in
their historical, order.

At one extreme stands anarchism, which must be thought of not as
anarchy and riot, but as a philosophical theory of society. Scientific
anarchism contemplates an ideal state of perfect freedom, in which the
State, the coercive exercise of authority by man over man, would not
exist. According to this theory only the individual has rights; there
is no more divinity of right in a majority than there is in kings.
Government is an invasion of the right of the individual to do as he
will, and should be abolished; with its abolition would vanish the
various moral, social, and industrial evils to which it has given
rise, and human society would develop on a higher plane. Stated in its
extreme form anarchism is evidently too ideal for frail human nature
as at present constituted. Of more practical importance has been the
theory of extreme individualism as set forth by Herbert Spencer--a
view designated by Huxley as the night-watchman theory of the State.
According to this the functions of government should be limited to       166
the protection of life and property and the enforcement of contracts,
but should not include such things as education, regulation of
industry, local improvements, charities, coinage, etc. Private
initiative and competition are trusted to supply these things, while
the economic harmony of the interests of each individual with those of
society will prevent any wrong from being done. The keynote of the
whole theory lies in the view that government is an evil, though a
necessary one, and should consequently be restricted. Adam Smith’s
system of “national liberty” went somewhat further, as it added to the
three functions named above, the construction of public works and
buildings, etc.; but it excluded such activities as education and the
civil courts, which we regard as most suited to government management.
This theory had its origin in the reaction against the undue
interference with industry by the Government under mercantilism and
had thus a historic justification and value.

The theory most generally held by economists and writers in the United
States is probably the modified individualism set forth by John Stuart
Mill. According to him, freedom of industry or “laissez faire should
be the general practice; every departure from it, unless required by
some great good, is a certain evil.” Industry, he said, should be left
to individuals and the Government should never interfere unless there
is an antagonism between social and private interests. Individuals
following their own interests will always conduct business better than
the Government, which is inefficient, corrupt, and can fall back on
taxation to cover its mistakes. Individualism should therefore be the
rule and governmental action the exception. But Mill himself admitted
that there was no theoretical limit to the extension of governmental
functions, and in so doing is said to have opened the door to
socialism. Nevertheless, the basic idea is still that government is
an evil and an extension of its activities is on the whole undesirable.  167

Opposed to this view is the culture state theory, enunciated by
Roscher and very generally held in Germany, which regards the State as
a beneficent, positive and constructive force in our industrial life.
The advocates of this theory point out that the functions of the
Government change with progress, and that in our complex modern
industrial life it should seek to improve conditions positively, and
not leave the people to the mercies of a blind competitive struggle;
practically, it should regulate industry, conditions of work, housing,
etc., and should manage all public utilities which affect the life or
well-being of the citizens, as railroads, telegraphs, industrial
insurance, etc. Still further in the same direction goes the view
known as state socialism, of whom the best-known advocate is Professor
Wagner. This advocates individualism, but insists that it is
responsible for many injustices and evils, which it is consequently
the duty of the State to redress. For instance, the State should
correct the inequalities of wealth brought about by the distribution
of the social income under the present competitive system; this should
be done by the progressive taxation of inheritances and incomes, the
limitation of inheritance and bequest, the government ownership of
public utilities, as railroads, telegraph, telephone, coal mines, etc.
This theory stops just short of socialism, but enlarges the functions
of the State to the largest degree compatible with individualism.
Beyond this, and at the farthest extreme from anarchism, stands
socialism, which, however, demands a more careful examination than the
other views have received because of its present prominence.

Socialism may be briefly defined in the words of Professor Ely[49] as
“that contemplated system of industrial society which proposes the
abolition of private property in the great material instruments of       168
production, and the substitution therefor of collective property; and
advocates the collective management of production, together with the
distribution of social income by society, and private property in the
larger proportion of this social income.” Four features are involved
in this definition, namely, common ownership, production,
distribution, and private incomes. The cardinal and distinctive
element in socialism is the collective or social ownership of the
means of production, that is, of the land and capital. Instead of
having these owned privately as today, they would be owned by the
people as a whole, by the State, and used by them for production.
Socialists do not oppose capital, as is often said, but only the
private ownership of capital. But under such a system private business
as we know it today, individual enterprise for the sake of profit,
could not exist. It is often urged that socialism means a “grand
divide,” and that in such an event the shrewder and more thrifty would
shortly have the wealth of the idle or stupid members of society. But
just that is guarded against under socialism, for there would be no
private ownership of capital, and hence no one could get his
neighbor’s share; it would all be held under collective ownership.
With the abolition of private capital, there would disappear of course
all the economic institutions that have grown up around it, as credit,
banking, lease, hire, the stock and produce exchanges, etc.

Socialism also means the collective or social organization and
management of industry. Socialists criticise severely our present
methods of production, which they call planless and wasteful. They
point to the constant recurrence of crises as an evidence of mistakes
of the competitive system, which they say could be obviated under a
well-organized comprehensive scheme. They also urge the wastes of
modern capitalism, in the duplication of plants, advertising (which
amounts to $500,000,000 a year in the United States and serves little    169
useful purpose), traveling salesmen, multiplication of small stores,
etc. Finally, an artificial disharmony between the interests of
society and private individuals is promoted by our system of private
property and profit: a coal trust limits the supply, farmers rejoice
over small crops, and planters burn part of their cotton, in short the
bounty of nature is regarded as a calamity. Some truth may be admitted
in these criticisms, but in answer it may be said that some of them
are being corrected under individualism, while as to those that remain
the remedy offered is worse than the disease. The first and
fundamental question is the effect of socialism on the amount
produced, for as we have seen any diminution would mean a worse
economic condition of society, even though it were offset by a more
equal distribution. Under individualism the appeal to industry and
thrift is the self-interest of the individual, and under the stimulus
of this motive the production of wealth has been increased enormously.
It is doubtful whether the motives of altruism, desire for social
approbation, and similar ones suggested by the socialists would
promote industrial activity as efficiently as the individualistic
desire for pecuniary gain.

Moreover the difficulties of organizing and managing all industries
would be enormous. According to the socialist plan, statistics of
consumption would be gathered in advance, the idle changes of fashion
would of course disappear, and production could be accurately
calculated. But aside from the problem of securing an honest and
efficient administration, the work of organizing industry from a
centralized bureau would probably prove insurmountable. The
distribution of the labor force among various employments suggests
another difficulty. Under individualism the necessary distribution
takes place through the agency of wage payments and the choice of an
occupation is left free to the individual. As the wage-system would
disappear with the abolition of private capital, some other means        170
would have to be devised, as allotment by the Government. But more
important would be the selection of the managers of industry;
competition provides a process whereby the inefficient are eliminated
and the able put in charge. As socialism would be an industrial
democracy the selection of the captains of industry under that system
would probably be made by election. Is it likely that the voters would
place over themselves the ablest, that is the strictest, most
economical, and most energetic man? Taking men as we find them today,
this may well be doubted.

But it is as a scheme of distribution that socialism has been most
warmly urged. The inequalities and injustices of present methods are
pointed out and a more just system demanded. Socialists themselves,
however, are not agreed as to what constitutes justice. Needs and
merits have both been urged as bases of distribution, but suffer from
vagueness and difficulty in administration; most socialists today
agree that equality of income would best meet the requirements of
justice. They claim that talented persons have been endowed by nature
with their abilities and should use them as a trust for society and
not expect greater rewards than their less talented brothers. To this
individualists answer that the practical question is, how to secure
the greatest exercise of these gifts, and that is now done by
appealing to the motive of self-interest. Some writers even go further
and assert that the desire for inequality is the chief stimulus to
invention and enterprise. A crucial point in every socialistic scheme
is the determination of value under such a system; most socialists
follow Marx and say that this should be determined by the “socially
necessary labor time” required for the production of an article. Such
a measure leaves out of account entirely the aspect of utility or
demand, and would clearly be inadequate. Prices would be fixed by the
State and would be calculated in labor time, which would probably be     171
represented by labor checks, which would constitute the media of
exchange of the socialistic society.

Finally, in the definition given above, it was stated that private
property would exist in the larger proportion of the social income
after it was divided. There is no reason why this should not be true,
for, though private capital would be abolished, the State would not
interfere with the individual in the use of his income after it was
earned. If one man preferred fine clothes and another pictures and
books, it would be possible for the latter person to accumulate such
articles of enjoyment or consumption. He could even have tools for
private carpentering or a horse for riding, but under no circumstances
would he be permitted to use these for production or as instruments of
private gain. Socialism must stand or fall as a system of production
and distribution; it is not necessary to criticise minor points. On
these broad grounds it must be rejected, although it may fairly be
admitted that socialists have often proved themselves keen and useful
critics of existing institutions.

Many persons in this and other countries, who do not approve of
socialism, nevertheless believe in the extension of state ownership or
activity along particular lines. Thus Henry George, though in other
respects an individualist, did not believe in the private ownership of
land. Land is limited in quantity and yields, because of its monopoly
character, an “unearned increment” or rent, quite apart from the
return due the owner for improvements. He proposed that the Government
should confiscate this unearned increment by levying a single tax on
all land equal to it. He thought that this would provide revenue
sufficient for all government needs without resorting to other forms
of taxation; in this he was undoubtedly mistaken, but the main
interest in the scheme for us is economic, and not financial. The
reason for the scheme was that land, being a limited monopoly, would
be increasingly in demand as society progressed, and that consequently   172
the landlords would absorb in their increased rents most of the
enlarged production of the future. This assumes that rents always
increase and never decrease, which is historically untrue. Nor does
the growth and progress of society necessarily increase the demand for
land; it may be directed to other things, while improvements in the
arts of agriculture may actually decrease this demand. We must,
however, admit that there are many instances of unearned increments,
not only in the case of ground rents, but also of monopoly profits
from various sources; these might very properly be secured to society
by means of special and heavy taxes.

The municipalization of local public utilities has been advocated by
many persons who are not socialists, except in so far as they desire
an extension of governmental activity along these lines. They urge
this because the utilities in question--gas, water, electricity,
telephone, street railways, etc.--are by their very nature monopolies,
and because under private control they are often inefficiently or
dishonestly managed. A less drastic remedy for these abuses might of
course be found in regulation. Unrestricted private control of
municipal monopolies is advocated by few; the real issue is between
public regulation and public management. And this issue will depend in
the last analysis upon the question which can give the best results to
society.




XIX. ECONOMIC PROGRESS.


At the conclusion of a study of this character we are inevitably led
to summarize our conclusions and to try to answer the question as to
what the lessons of the past have taught us. In what direction are the
forces of economic life taking us? The conclusion of this text is that
they are making for economic progress, and it will be worth while to
justify as far as possible this belief. It is, however, impossible       173
to do this except in very general terms, for definite data for
measuring this improvement do not exist, and economic progress itself
is a somewhat vague conception. Even such comparatively simple facts
as the rate of wages or the hours of labor can be stated only very
generally. But both of these show a decided improvement in the
condition of the working class. A careful investigation for Great
Britain by Mr. A. L. Bowley[50] shows that if wages for the decade
1890-1900 be represented as 100 then the course of wages during the
nineteenth century would have run somewhat as follows:

  =========+================++===========+===============
   Decade  | Relative Wages ||  Decade   | Relative Wages
  ---------+----------------++-----------+---------------
   1800-10 |      55-65     ||  1850-60  |       65
   1810-20 |      65-70     ||  1860-70  |       75
   1820-30 |        65      ||  1870-80  |       95
   1830-40 |        60      ||  1880-90  |       90
   1840-50 |        60      || 1890-1900 |      100
  ---------+----------------++-----------+---------------

Without investigating the validity of the figures too closely, it may
safely be affirmed that the movement of wages has been distinctly
upward, and that the rise was certainly not less than 50 per cent. For
the United States the increase has not been so great, probably because
wages started at a higher level. According to the Aldrich report, if
wages and prices in 1860 in the United States be taken as 100,
relative wages in 1840 were 82.5 and relative prices 98.5; in 1880,
they were respectively 143 and 103.4; in 1903, they were 187 and 103.
That is to say, relative wages showed a marked advance and real wages,
owing to the fact that general prices remained almost stationary, an
even greater improvement. So, too, the hours of labor appear to have
been shortened in Great Britain about two hours a day (from 10 to 14
hours to 8 to 12), and in the United States probably as much, the
average length of the working day in certain employments decreasing      174
from 10.3 hours in 1880 to 9.6 hours in 1903.

In the field of production the most dramatic and striking advances
have been achieved. The application of steam and more recently of
electricity as the motive power for the newly invented and constantly
improved machinery has permitted an enormous expansion of production,
which has been made still greater by the opening up of new mines and
new lands and improvements in the machinery of transportation and
exchange and in the organization of business. Especially in the United
States where the natural resources were especially rich and the people
energetic and ingenious, has the growth of wealth been marvelous. And
yet almost a century after the beginning of the Industrial Revolution
in England, Mill alleged that labor-saving inventions had not
lightened the toil of any human being; they have only enabled a
greater number to live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment.
What answer can we make to this indictment today? Why is it that the
working class still has so little of this vast increase of wealth and
still lives so close to the border line of poverty?

To answer this question thoroughly would require an analysis of the
subject of distribution, but a few reasons may be briefly
suggested.[51] While the social income has been greatly increased by
these improvements the amount paid in rent to owners of land, water
powers, etc., has also grown. If we approve of private property in
land as best adapted to stimulate its use for society, then we must
admit the justice of rent, and of its payment to present land owners.
Similarly, too, the payment of interest to the owners of capital has
absorbed a large part of the increased income of society, though the
proportion going to this factor is probably growing smaller owing to
the fall in the rate of interest. But as we have seen, modern industry
is essentially capitalistic, that is, it depends upon the use of         175
capital for its operations. Since we allow private property in capital
and believe that to be the best method yet devised for securing its
accumulation, we must justify interest. Profits in general are fairly
earned by industrial organizers and others who manage our businesses,
and are necessary to enlist their services. Probably in most cases
society does not overpay these leaders of industry. But some forms of
profit, as those derived solely from monopoly, especially from the
monopoly of limited natural resources, are both too large and socially
unearned. These society should clearly control and absorb.

One reason then why labor has not profited more by the great increase
in wealth is that the other factors in production have laid claim to
their shares also. There is good reason for believing, however, that
the share of labor has been steadily growing greater all the time, and
that it today gets a larger proportion of the social income than ever
before. This fact is obscured by the great growth in population, which
has more than doubled in the last hundred years in Europe and has
shown a twentyfold increase in the United States. The larger income is
divided among more people, and though each today gets more than his
grandfather, there is not yet enough produced to make all rich.
Indeed, if the wealth of the United States were divided equally, it
would not provide a competence for anybody. The difficulty is not
merely that there is inequality in distribution, but that the need of
a much greater production of wealth must also be met. Inequalities may
be adjusted by such measures as progressive inheritance taxes, but
resort to this or similar methods must not be so severe as to weaken
the motives for the accumulation of capital. That must form one of the
strongest reasons for rejecting the drastic proposals of socialism.

Improvements in production have, however, not merely increased the
total output; they have greatly reduced the cost of many articles        176
and have brought within the reach of the poorest consumers others
which a century ago would have been unattainable. Improvements in
transportation have served to bring an ever-increasing variety of
products to market. The material progress of a people can be gaged
fairly well by their consumption of certain semi-luxuries, such as
tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco, beer, etc.; these show a steady increase
during the past century. “Thus in the United States between 1871 and
1903 inclusive, the per capita consumption of coffee increased from
7.91 to 10.79 pounds, that of sugar from 36.2 pounds to 71.1 pounds,
that of malt liquors from 6.1 gallons to 18.04 gallons, that of wheat
and flour from 4.69 bushels to 5.81 bushels.”[52] A similar
investigation for Great Britain shows an average increase in a
considerably larger list of the same character of 40 per cent between
1860-64 and 1895-96. It must be admitted that there is much lack of
economy in present consumption; there is often wasteful and positively
injurious consumption, an illustration of which would be found by many
persons in the increased consumption of malt liquors cited above. From
a purely economic standpoint the enormous waste of war and the
burdensome cost of military and naval armament must also be condemned.

The task of prophecy is usually a fruitless one, but at least it is
now possible for us to indicate some of the lines along which reform
is needed, and the goal towards which the future of progress will
probably move. The natural resources of the nation must be more
carefully conserved and reckless destruction prevented; at the same
time the monopolization of limited resources by private individuals or
corporations must be rigidly restricted. The growth of trusts seems
but the last step in a steady growth in size of the business unit and
may be accepted as an economical method of industrial organization,
but the evils of corporate financial management must be carefully
guarded against. The growth of labor organizations, on the other         177
hand, must be admitted to be equally logical and desirable. While they
often display monopolistic tendencies, yet our main reliance must be
placed upon these agencies to secure bargains for laborers on terms of
equality with their employers. But on behalf of wage-earners not
easily organized we must resort to state interference by means of
factory and labor legislation in order to secure equitable labor
contracts. Free competition which exposes women and children to the
greed of unscrupulous employers is defended by no one today, and it is
clearly recognized that legislation along these lines must be further
extended, as for instance in the direction of industrial insurance,
old age pensions, adequate care for the unemployable, etc.

Reforms in our banking and currency laws, an extension of banking
facilities to the working classes, the more careful regulation of
railroad rates, reforms in methods of taxation, and a reduction in the
tariff--all are called for by the development and readjustment of
industry. On the other hand, much remains to be done in the education
of the mass of the people to habits of rational living and enjoyment.
In the great cities housing conditions should be effectively
regulated, sweatshops suppressed, intemperance discouraged, and where
possible a love of art and outdoor life promoted. A more rational use
of income would increase the material well-being of the people
considerably. Problems of distribution are still more insistent. No
one who has the welfare of the laboring classes or of our democratic
society at heart can view with approval the existence of widely
separated classes, with disproportionate political and economic power.
Greater equality in fortunes--a leveling up of incomes--must certainly
be regarded as a sound social ideal. On the other hand, we have seen
reason to reject the drastic remedies of socialism as a cure for the
injustices of present methods of distribution or production.
Improvement must come by conservative reform along the lines of our      178
past development. In the last analysis all attempts to improve
conditions permanently depend upon the character and capacity of the
individual. Because of this fact education assumes great
importance--education not merely in the art of production but also in
that supreme art, the art of living.


  [1] Tarr, Economic Geology of the U. S., pp. 7, 119.

  [2] In Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. XIX, p. 3.

  [3] McVey, Modern Industrialism, p. 145.

  [4] The Truth About the Trusts, p. 469.

  [5] Tetter, Principles of Economics, p. 321.

  [6] Bogart, Economic History of the U. S., p. 412.

  [7] XIX, 645.

  [8] Seager, Introduction to Economics, 176.

  [9] Evolution of Modern Capitalism, 35.

  [10] Economics, 121.

  [11] F. J. Stimson, Labor in its Relation to Law, 51.

  [12] Bullock, Introduction to the Study of Economics, 428.

  [13] Stimson, op. cit., 71.

  [14] A. H. Ruegg, Law of Employer & Workman in England, 99.

  [15] Rep. of U. S. Ind. Com., XVII. 1.

  [16] Rep. Ind. Com., XVII, xlii.

  [17] E. L. Bogart, The Chicago Building Trades Dispute, in Pol. Sci.
       Quart., XVI., 134; also in Commons, Trade Unionism & Labor
       Problems, p. 107.

  [18] Bogart, op. cit., p. 137.

  [19] Economics, 353.

  [20] Political Economy, 381.

  [21] Evolution of Modern Capitalism, 297.

  [22] Wealth & Progress, 171.

  [23] Report Industrial Commission, XIX, 926.

  [24] Getting a Living, 475.

  [25] Report Industrial Commission, XIX, 746.

  [26] Ind. Com., Rep: XIX, 757.

  [27] Bull. of U. S. Bur. of Lab., Sept., 1908, p. 418.

  [28] Economics, 337.

  [29] Industrial Evolution of the United States, ch. 28.

  [30] Evol. of Mod. Cap., 229.

  [31] The Effects of Machinery on Wages, 65.

  [32] Principles of Economics, I, 315.

  [33] Industrial Efficiency, II, 451.

  [34] Schloss, Methods of Industrial Remuneration, 305.

  [35] Report, VII, 644.

  [36] Economics, 377.

  [37] Political Economy, 344, 345.

  [38] Economics, 133.

  [39] Bliss, Encyclopedia of Social Reform, art. Distribution, p. 501.

  [40] Economics, 360.

  [41] Stated technically, its marginal productivity is small and
       hence its reward is also small.

  [42] More truly, the marginal productivity theory.

  [43] J. R Commons, the Distribution of Wealth, 252.

  [44] More, Wage-earners’ Budgets, 269.

  [45] Today the loss is probably double this sum.

  [46] Gide, Political Economy, Rev. Ed., 663.

  [47] Seager, Introduction to Economics, 73.

  [48] Bullock, Introduction to Study of Economics, 106.

  [49] Socialism and Social Reform, 19.

  [50] Wages in the United Kingdom in the Nineteenth Century.

  [51] Acknowledgment should be made at this point of indebtedness
       to the excellent final chapter in Prof. H. R. Seager’s
       Introduction to Economics.

  [52] Adams and Sumner, Labor Problems, 523.






MANUFACTURING.                                                           179

BY O. P. AUSTIN.

[Chief of Bureau of Statistics, Department of Commerce and Labor.
Native of Illinois. Engaged in newspaper work on arriving at manhood,
and so continued in Chicago, Cincinnati and Washington, as reporter,
editor and Washington correspondent, until appointed Chief of the
Bureau of Statistics in 1898. Author of many official monographs,
including: “Commercial Orient,” “Commercial Porto Rico, Hawaii and
Philippine Islands,” “Commercial Alaska,” “American Commerce,”
“Submarine and Land Telegraphs of the World,” “Transportation Routes
and Systems of the World,” “National Debts of the World,” “Great
Canals of the World,” “Colonies of the World and Their Government,”
“Colonial Administration,” “Territorial Expansion of the United
States,” etc., etc. Also author of publications for instruction of
youth in national and international affairs. Member of American
Academy of Political and Social Science, American Association of
Geographers, American Economic Association, International Union for
Comparative Jurisprudence and Political Economy, Central Statistical
Commission of Belgium, Associate Editor National Geographic Magazine;
Lecturer.]




INTRODUCTION.


The production of manufactures for the requirements of the world’s
population is conducted in a comparatively small section of its land
surface. Just as the manager of a great estate devotes one section of
his estate to the production of certain articles, and other sections
to certain other articles, so the great business instinct which rules
the business of the world carries on in its various sections the
varied industries best suited to the physical, ethnological and
financial conditions of its various sections.

The people of western Europe and eastern United States are, for
various reasons better able to produce the manufactures required by
the world than are those of South America, Africa or the Orient;
while, on the other hand, the people of South America, the Orient,
Australia, Canada, the western part of the United States or the
eastern part of Europe are better able, for various reasons, to
produce the raw materials of manufacturing and the food supplies
required by those engaged in the manufacturing industry than are the
people of western Europe or eastern United States. South America and
Australia produce wool in large quantities; Africa and the Amazon
Valley produce the chief supply of india rubber; the Malayan peninsula
and adjacent islands produce the bulk of the world’s tin; India
produces jute; the Philippines, Manila hemp; Mexico, sisal; China and    180
Japan, the bulk of the world’s silk; Egypt, India and the United
States, the world’s cotton; Russia, Austria-Hungary, India,
Australasia, South America, Canada, the central and western parts of
the United States produce the bulk of the world’s wheat, corn and
meats, at least the bulk of that in excess of the requirements for
local consumption; Europe, the West Indies, the East Indies and the
tropical sections of India, China and Central and South America
produce the bulk of the world’s sugar.

The manufacturing industries of the world--confining this term for the
moment to those industries in which the great proportion of the work
is performed by machinery--are conducted chiefly in, it might almost
be said confined to, western Europe and eastern United States. True,
the exclusive application of the word “manufactures” to that portion
of the world’s product of this character made by the use of machinery
in conjunction with large sums of capital--the factory method--carries
one beyond the original meaning of the word “manufactures,” which
primarily meant, of course, made by the hand (from manus, the hand;
and facere, to make); but the industrial habits of the world have also
passed beyond that stage in which manufacturing for the masses is
carried on by hand methods.

It must not be understood from this that all of the world’s
manufactures are produced in western Europe and eastern United States,
or produced by modern machine methods in conjunction with the
investment of great sums of money--the factory system. On the
contrary, large quantities of manufactures are still produced by hand
in various parts of the world other than those in which manufactures
by modern machine methods are a leading characteristic of the
occupations of the people. Nor must it be assumed that the areas
designated as the non-manufacturing sections are entirely dependent
upon the manufacturing sections for their manufactures. On the
contrary, large quantities of manufactures are still produced in the     181
Orient, in Africa, South America, Australia and the islands of the sea
by those simple processes which prevailed in Europe and the United
States prior to the development of the modern methods less than two
centuries ago. The industrious population of China, of India, of
Japan, the millions of people in Africa, in South America and in the
islands of the sea produce by simple methods large quantities, and in
many cases a large proportion, of the simple manufactures which they
require for their daily life. The cloth with which they cover their
bodies, the simple requirements of household life and of agriculture
are, in many cases, largely of their own production and made in
keeping with the original meaning of the word “manufacture”--made by
hand.

But the statement is still true, that the great manufacturing areas of
the world--the areas which give their chief attention, or the
continuous attention of a large part of their population, to the
production of those requirements of man other than the natural
products and do this through the application of power, machinery and
capital, and the operations thereof under the factory system, are
western Europe and the eastern part of the United States, though the
systems which prevail there are gradually extending to other parts of
the world--eastern Europe, central, southern and western United
States, Japan, India, Australia, Canada and South America.

As to the relative share of the world’s manufactures now produced by
the use of machinery, power and capital--the factory method--and by
the hand process, respectively, no exact statement can be made; nor
are there facilities for even offering an intelligent estimate of the
relative production by these two methods. There is reason to believe
that two-thirds of the cotton cloth consumed in China is still made by
the hand process, and if this be true it may be estimated that perhaps
two-thirds of the other manufactures consumed in that country are        182
still made by hand; while in those other sections of the world in
which railroads and the other methods which the people of the Occident
are pleased to term “modern” do not yet prevail, a large proportion of
the simple manufactures of the people, are still those produced by
hand methods. The fact, however, that the sections which produce
manufactures by modern methods are also supplied with modern
facilities of transportation--the railroad and the steamship; and of
communication--the telegraph, and also supplied with ample sums of
capital and that other important quality born of long experience and
the energy supplied by a temperate zone climate and the judicious
admixture of the most energetic populations of the world--Europe and
the United States--has enabled them to distribute their factory
products in great quantities to those sections not producing by the
factory method, and whose peoples are willing to exchange their
natural products, food and raw materials, for the finished products of
the factory.

This brings us to a consideration of the exchanges of the world--the
exchanges of natural products for the products of the factory. This
exchange, as already intimated, occurs chiefly in the requirements of
the manufacturing section--raw materials and food--for manufactures.
Western Europe, the great manufacturing section of that grand
division, does not produce cotton, jute, or a sufficient supply of
wool, silk, or hemp. For its india rubber, its tin, its copper and the
numerous articles of tropical production required for manufacturing,
it is dependent wholly or chiefly upon other parts of the world. The
United States, while producing a large share of the world’s cotton and
copper and iron, and a considerable supply of wool, must rely upon
other parts of the world for its hemp and jute and sisal and india
rubber and silk and many other of its tropical requirements. As a
result the Orient exchanges its raw silk, its jute, its Manila hemp,
its tin, and numerous less important articles, for the factory           183
products of Europe and the United States. Australia exchanges its
wool, its meats and its gold for the products of the manufacturing
sections. Africa sends its india rubber, its ostrich feathers, its
gold and diamonds in exchange for factory products of those sections
in which the manufacturing system has developed. South America offers
as its exchangeable products wool, wheat, corn, meats, coffee and
india rubber. Canada gives in exchange for her factory requirements
timber, ores, wheat and other agricultural products.

Thus the business intelligence that rules the world, adapting one to
another those various conditions which prevail in its varying
sections, has built up in certain sections of its great area--Europe
and the United States--a great factory system, operated by the great
supplies of power (coal) which there exist in conjunction with the
wealth, the intelligence, the climatic conditions and the quality of
population, which system, besides supplying its own six hundred
millions of people with their own requirements, sends to the other ten
hundred millions of people in other parts of the world its surplus
products and takes in exchange the natural products, the manufacturing
material and food required by its own people and its own industries.

George J. Chisholm, in the Introduction to Bartholomew’s Atlas of the
World’s Commerce, outlines the history of the development of
manufactures and the relation thereof to commerce as follows:

     “In the latter part of the eighteenth century there took place in
     England a number of inventions which have brought about a change
     in the conditions of manufacturing industry and of commerce, and
     an acceleration of the rate of the economic development of the
     world, to which all previous history presents no parallel or
     approach to a parallel. It is a change that has affected the
     entire world, bringing about an entirely new trade with the New
     World and the antipodes, and completely altering the character      184
     of the trade with the East, depriving spices of the peculiar
     value which they held in commerce for so many centuries, and
     developing a trade of incomparably greater magnitude with the
     East than was at one time ever dreamt of, and largely in
     commodities of a bulky character yielding comparatively little
     profit on small quantities. The revolution was inaugurated by the
     inventions in connection with the cotton industry between 1769
     and 1785 and the concurrent improvements in the steam engine by
     James Watt, who thereby first made this a generally serviceable
     machine. These were followed by the introduction of steam
     locomotion by land and water in the first quarter, and the rapid
     extension of these modes of transport in the remainder of the
     nineteenth century. The result of these inventions was to give a
     new value to the stores of coal and iron in the United Kingdom,
     and ultimately a new value to undeveloped land in new countries.
     It was railways that first made it possible to fill great ships
     with bulky produce like grain drawn from the far interior. The
     remarkable expansion of commerce thus brought about greatly
     increased the commercial advantages of Great Britain due to its
     situation and local facilities for shipping. In so far, however,
     as the unexampled development of British manufacturing industry
     and commerce in the period immediately following the Industrial
     Revolution was due not to geographical conditions but merely to
     the fact that the great inventions originated there and
     consequently the resources of Great Britain for carrying on
     manufactures by the new methods were developed first, the
     expansion of British manufactures and commerce was bound to be
     affected by the development of similar resources elsewhere; and
     the more rapid growth of manufactures in some rival countries
     resulting from this cause, and partly, it may be, from other
     causes, has been one of the marked features of recent economic
     history.”




I. MODERN MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS OF THE WORLD.                            185


The manufacturing systems of the world have developed from mere hand
and household industries to those of the machine and factory in less
than two centuries. For thousands of years the simple requirements of
men--of clothing, of domestic life, of agriculture and of
transportation--were met with articles produced by hand labor,
performed for the greatest part in the household or in simple
workshops adjacent thereto. Then, in the latter half of the eighteenth
century, man discovered that he could harness the power of the
waterfall and, by making the wheels which it turned turn other wheels,
could utilize that power in performing many tasks which he had
hitherto performed laboriously by hand. The turning wheels twisted the
wool and flax and cotton into threads stronger and finer and better
than his wife had been accustomed to twist with the spinning wheel and
distaff, and produced in a single day as much of this yarn as a
hundred industrious women could produce in a week or a fortnight. By
gearing the wheels to operate a loom he could weave the yarn into
cloth with a small fraction of the labor and time which had been
required to weave it by the hand loom and obtain better results.

Thus arose the custom of manufacturing by machinery operated by the
power of the waterfall the cloth which had hitherto been manufactured
by hand labor in the household; this was the beginning of the modern
manufacturing industry.

To do this, however, it was necessary to plant the machines beside the
waterfall and bring to them the raw material and the persons necessary
to operate them, for the machine was unable to perform its task unless
assisted by the intelligent labor and guidance of experienced men and
women. Thus arose the system of performing in a single workshop, with    186
the aid of a considerable number of people and machines, the
manufacturing which had been hitherto performed by many people in many
households and with many machines of simpler form and operated by
human power--the factory system.

This new system developed new occupations. The buildings in which the
work was carried on must be constructed. The machinery required for
operating the factory must be made and kept in repair, and new
machines made to take the place of those worn out. So there came
occupation for mechanics and skilled machinists in manufacturing and
repairing the machines, and for others skilled in operating them. The
material used in manufacturing the cloth must be transported to the
factory, instead of being used at the place where it was grown as
formerly; and the cloth must again be transported to the consumer; and
thus there were new occupations for man and beast in transportation
and in constructing and maintaining the roads over which the material
was transported. Still another, and equally important, industry
developed was that of supplying the food and other requirements of the
men and women engaged in the factory, and this gave new activity to
the agricultural industries near the factory and further occupation to
those engaged in transportation.

To supply the wants of those employed in the factories, who were so
busily engaged that they could not find time to grow their own food,
or make their own clothing, other enterprising men and women
established themselves near the factory to sell the required food and
household supplies, to supply the fuel with which they cooked their
daily food, to buy small portions of the cloth made in the factory and
turn it into clothing to sell to the operatives, to shave their rough
beards and occasionally trim their hair--and thus arose the factory
town.

So the factory system, which at first threatened to take away the        187
occupation of thousands who had formerly devoted their time to making
yarn and cloth by hand labor, developed new occupations and new
industries, and brought portions of the hitherto scattered people into
groups, and these groups in time developed better accommodations for
themselves and their families in homes, in comforts of life, in
educational facilities, and in hours of labor; and in doing this they
also supplied the masses with cloth at a less cost of labor than they
had formerly expended in obtaining it.

Meantime man was learning another important lesson, one which was to
develop even more rapidly the art of manufacturing. He found through a
long series of experiments that power could be generated by heating
water until it turned into an expansive vapor which he called steam,
and that this expansive force could be controlled in such manner as to
put in operation a machine which he called the steam engine, which
could in turn transmit its power to that machinery formerly operated
exclusively by the power of the waterfall.

This discovery again revolutionized the manufacturing industry, which
had hitherto been limited in the scope of its operations by the supply
of water power so located that the raw material could be transported
to it and the finished products in turn transported thence to market.
With this new force, steam, by which the manufacturing machinery could
be made entirely independent of the waterfall, the factories were
located at points convenient to the natural supply of fuel and
manufacturing material or to the market for the finished products.
Where this was not practicable the factories were located at places to
which the materials could be readily and cheaply carried by water
transportation, either on some navigable stream or the sea-coast.

Another important contribution made by steam power to the development    188
of the manufacturing industry was the decrease in cost of
transportation. Before the development of the railway and the
steamship the material of manufacture, unless produced within a short
distance of some navigable water, canals, rivers, lakes or oceans, was
of comparatively little value. It was not always practicable to plant
the factory in the section which most readily produced the wool or
cotton or flax or hemp or silk, or to place it alongside the iron or
copper mine; and even if this were done the manufactured material was
valueless unless it could be transported to those requiring it. Even
the lighter articles of manufacture, such as wool or cotton or fibers
or silk, could not be transported any considerable distance without
greatly increasing the cost to the manufacturer, and thus
proportionately advancing the cost of the manufactured article. But
when, in the middle of the nineteenth century, the railways began to
penetrate the continents and the steamships began to cross the ocean
and extend their tours to the commercially undeveloped sections of the
world, the manufacturers found new sources of supply open to them and
quantities of raw material reaching them from distant lands at such
comparatively low cost as to enable them to enlarge their output,
increase the variety of their productions and reduce the cost of both
the necessities and conveniences and luxuries which they were offering
to the public. The railways of the world grew from 25,000 miles in
1850 to 500,000 miles in 1900 and 600,000 in 1909. The tonnage of
steam vessels on the navigable waters of the world grew from less than
one million tons in 1850 to 24 million in 1909; and the carrying power
of the sail and steam vessels of the world, measured in sail tons,
grew from 15 million tons in 1850 to 100 million in 1909. The general
reduction in freight rates meantime is illustrated by the fact that
the price of transporting wheat from Chicago to New York by rail         189
fell from 33½ cents per bushel in 1872 to 10 cents per bushel in
1900, and the charge for transporting wheat from New York to Liverpool
fell from 17 cents per bushel in 1875 to 3 cents per bushel in 1905;
and similar reductions were made in the charges for transporting
manufacturers’ materials.

Thus the application of steam to manufacturing and transportation
multiplied the power of production. The area over which it could be
performed was greatly enlarged, the cost of materials was reduced
through cheaper transportation, new devices and processes were
developed as a result of the competition, cheaper raw material was
obtained from countries where plentiful supplies and cheap labor give
low prices, and the opportunity of locating the factory near the place
of production or at some convenient meeting point between the various
places of production--all these contributed to reduction of cost and
increase of supplies of material of manufacture. The great iron and
steel works of western Pennsylvania, and northern Ohio, Indiana and
Illinois, for example, are located not at the iron mines or the coal
fields, but at places between these two fields to which these
materials can be cheaply carried from their respective places of
production. The iron ore is chiefly produced in the Lake Superior
region and carried at a very low cost by vessels especially
constructed for this purpose to the southern shores of Lake Erie. The
coal is chiefly produced in western Pennsylvania and central Ohio,
Indiana and Illinois. The cost of transporting the coal from the mine
to the lake shore, or the ore from the lake shore to the mine, or both
coal and ore to some mutually convenient meeting point by river or
canal or railroads constructed for this purpose across a comparatively
level country, is extremely small, less in many cases than that of
carrying material to the waterfall which is not infrequently located
at places difficult of access. The vessels carrying the manufactures
of the United States or the manufacturing countries of Europe to         190
South America, Africa and the Orient, bring back at a very low cost
the india rubber, the tin, the fibers, the wool, the silk, the
Egyptian cotton of those distant countries; and the manufacturer who a
century ago was limited in his supply of raw materials to the
immediate vicinity of his factory may now bring his material from all
parts of the world, while the area in which he may sell his products
has been correspondingly enlarged.

One very recent contribution to the convenience and cheapness of
manufacture is found in the transmission of power in the form of
electricity. Formerly the machines of the factory were operated by
power obtained from the steam engine or the water wheel through lines
of shafting, gearing, belts, friction pulleys, etc. This made it
necessary that the factory operated by water power be placed alongside
the waterfall, or at least within a comparatively short distance of
the source of power. Recent inventions have made it possible to
transform power into electricity, carry that electricity hundreds of
miles on a wire, and transform it back into power for the operation of
the machinery of the factory or the transportation of the raw material
or the finished product. This has increased greatly the value of the
world’s water power in its relation to manufacturing. Formerly only a
small part of the waterfalls of the world were used at all, largely
because of their comparative inaccessibility and the cost of
transporting the raw material to them and the finished product from
them. Now that power, generated at any point, however inaccessible for
freight handling, may be transmitted in the form of electricity on a
simple piece of wire to any convenient point within a hundred or even
two hundred miles of the place of production, and by a simple process
applied to the operations of machines small or large, simple or
complex, the possibilities of the waterfall in supplying power for the
manufacturer are greatly enlarged.

Not only is this true of the waterfalls now in existence but of those    191
which may be brought into existence, for now that man has found a way
to use the power thus generated he may readily increase the number of
waterfalls by constructing dams at many places, and using the water
over and over again in its flow from the place of origin to the ocean
level. The great quantities of water stored up in the form of snow and
ice in the mountain ranges of the world, and gradually liberated by
melting may supply almost untold quantities of power as they flow down
the mountain sides used not merely once but many times. The
manufacturing power of Italy, Switzerland and southern France is now
being greatly augmented by this process.

Another possibility of the use of this new distributor of power,
electricity, is the multiplying of workshops and the return in some
instances and certain articles to household or small shop manufacture.
It is now so easy to introduce the electric wire and a small electric
motor into the household or the shop adjoining the household and to so
operate small machines for the various processes in many of the
manufacturing industries, that this new use of electricity for the
transmission of power is already making visible changes in the factory
systems of the world, and promises still greater changes. In many
lines of manufacture in which the machinery occupies small space and
requires little power and the quantity of material handled is not
great, such as watch and clock making, the manufacture of clothing,
boots and shoes, toys, etc., a part or all of the work can now be
performed in the household or small shop through the power generated
miles away and brought into the workman’s home on a simple piece of
wire.

On the other hand the use of electricity in the great factory or
manufacturing establishment is equally important. Instead of
transmitting the power of the engine to the various classes of
machinery by belts, shafting and gearing, much of it is now              192
transmitted and applied in the form of electricity. Great cranes which
handle many tons of material are operated by the electric motor
without the intervention of the costly shafting, belting and gearing;
and the great magnet, made such by electricity, picks up its ton of
steel rails with the same ease that the toy magnet picks up the
needle, and is managed with no greater physical exertion than the
other.

Cassier’s Magazine, an accepted authority on engineering matters,
publishes with favorable editorial comment, in its issue of September,
1909, a statement by Sylvester Stewart that “we could take out in
regions where water power is needed at least a hundred times as much
water power as is now employed, furnishing a safer and cleaner power
than steam, at a lower cost, and thus prolong the existence of our
coal fields. * * * A running stream may be compared to an endless
driving belt only awaiting connection to the machinery it is capable
of driving, but it has not been appreciated because we have become so
familiar with it; if it had suddenly been discovered, doubtless it
would have been harnessed immediately. Coal is passing away, but water
flows continuously. A hundred thousand horsepower may be taken from a
river and its place is still filled, but the coal vein once emptied is
emptied forever.” Mr. Stewart adds that probably not one-thousandth
part of the water power of the world is now utilized, and that while
the greater part of this power is not at present available, because of
its existence in out-of-the-way places, or in rivers so deep and
sluggish that the energy obtainable from them would cost more than
steam power, at least a hundred times as much water power as is now
used could be, under present conditions, utilized in a manner to
supply it at less than the cost of coal at present prices.




II. THE USE OF MACHINERY IN MANUFACTURING.                               193


The statements made in this discussion that the great expansion in the
production of manufactures came with the adoption of machinery for
manufacturing must not be understood as meaning that no machinery was
used in manufacturing prior to the period of expansion. Machines have
been used in manufacturing for many centuries.

The spinning wheel, used many hundred years ago, was a machine, and so
was the hand loom, by which the threads spun by the wheel were woven
into cloth. Flax and wool were originally turned into thread by the
use of the distaff, a stick to which the spinner attached a small
portion of the fiber, and by revolving the stick against his body
twisted the fibers into a thread. Then by letting the end of the stick
drop downward he drew out the thread, and with another roll of the
stick against his body again twisted the fibers and lengthened the
thread, which he then wound around the distaff. After many years of
this process it occurred to somebody that by setting the distaff in a
frame and passing a cord or a piece of rawhide around it and also
around a large wheel and turning the wheel he could get a much more
rapid and regular revolution of the distaff. This was the beginning of
the use of the “machine” in the making of yarn, for the spinning wheel
was a machine, of a crude type, to be sure, but a machine. This served
many generations of men and women for the manufacture of thread and
yarn, from flax, from wool and from cotton.

To turn this thread or yarn into cloth another “machine” was used, the
loom, which, by fixing the thread on certain frames and passing other
threads back and forth as the frames were raised or lowered, formed
the cloth. But this “machine,” the loom, was operated by human power,
as was that other machine, the spinning wheel. The women and children
spun the thread or yarn, the father and sons operated the loom,          194
chiefly in the winter months in which they had no occupation in the
fields. If a man chose to give his time to weaving and became a weaver
by trade he lightened his heavy labors at times by attention to the
garden surrounding his workshop, performing the necessary work for the
production of his food supply. “The workshop of the weaver,” says Ure
in his History of the Cotton Manufactures, “was a rural cottage from
which, when he was tired of the sedentary labor, he could sally forth
into his little garden and with the spade or hoe attend to his
culinary products. The cotton which was to form his weft was picked
clean by the fingers of his younger children and was carded and spun
by the older girls assisted by his wife, and the yarn was woven by
himself assisted by his sons.” In the manufacture of woolen goods
conditions were similar. “The work,” says James in his History of the
Worsted Manufactures, “was entirely domestic, and its different
branches widely scattered over the country. The manufacturer had to
travel on horseback to purchase his wool among the farmers or at the
great fairs or markets, and the wool, after being sorted and combed,
was distributed among the peasantry and received back as yarn. The
machine used by them was still the old one-thread spinning wheel, and
in summer weather on many a village green might be seen the housewives
plying their busy trade. Returning with his yarn the manufacturer had
to seek out his weavers, who ultimately delivered to him his camelets
or russells or calimancoes ready for sale to the merchant or delivery
to the dyer.”

These are pictures of the manufacturing industry in England as late as
1770. “Machines” were in use, but of the simplest type, and all
operated by the power of the man or woman using them, or at the best
by human or animal power, and in most cases the work was performed in
the household or a small shop adjoining the household.

The transformation to the “machine method” or factory system began       195
when some power greater than that of man or beast was applied to the
operation of the machines, and the machines themselves were so
enlarged as to multiply their producing power. “In tracing the effect
of the application of modern machinery to English industry,” says
Hobson in his Evolution of Modern Capitalism, “there appear two
prominent factors, the growth of improved mechanical apparatus, and
the evolution of extra-human motor power. We speak of the industry
which has prevailed since the middle of the eighteenth century as
‘machine production’ not because there were no machines before that
time but, firstly, because a vast acceleration in the invention of
complex machinery applied to almost all industrial arts dates from
that period, and secondly, because the application upon an extended
scale of non-human motor powers manifested itself then for the first
time.” “The water frame, the carding engine, and the other machines
which Arkwright brought out, in a finished state,” says Cooke Taylor
in his History of the Factory System, “required both more space than
could be found in a cottage and more power than could be applied by
the human arm. Their weight required them to be placed in strongly
built walls, and they could not be advantageously turned by any power
then known but that of water. Further, the use of machinery was
accompanied by a greater division of labor, and therefore a greater
co-operation was necessary to bring all the processes under a central
supervision.”

The new and enlarged machines which were thus operated by water power
and brought together in factories had been invented chiefly during the
eighteenth century. John Kay, in 1738, invented what was known as the
flying shuttle, which doubled the amount of weaving which could be
performed by one man in a given time. Hargreaves, in 1764, invented      196
the spinning jenny, a machine which operated a number of spindles for
spinning yarn, and so did many times as much as one spinner with a
spinning wheel could do. Arkwright, a few years later, devised the
water frame, by which the spinning jenny could be operated by water
power. Crompton, a little later developed the “spinning mule,” which
combined the important qualities of the spinning jenny and the water
frame. Before the end of the century the steam engine began to supply
power and was utilized in many cases where water power was not
available. Then, in 1792, came Whitney’s cotton gin, by which the
seeds were readily extracted from the cotton, and that valuable fiber
rendered much more available for manufacturing purposes.

The effect of the development of the machine and factory system,
through the devices of these thoughtful men, enormously increased the
manufacturing industries of England and later of the other parts of
the world. The importations of cotton into England prior to the
invention of the spinning jenny averaged less than 2 million pounds
per annum. With the invention of the spinning jenny and the water
frame the importation of cotton and cotton manufacture quickly doubled
and trebled and then grew at such rapid rate that by 1800 the
importation was about 40 million pounds, by 1830, 260 million pounds
and by 1840 over 400 million pounds. The importation of wool grew from
less than 2 million pounds in the latter part of the eighteenth
century to 150 million pounds in 1860 and over 700 million pounds in
1890, though in this article of manufacture the growth in importation
was less strongly marked than in cotton because of the fact that much
of the wool used in manufacture was produced at home, while all of the
cotton used was imported.

In the iron and steel industry the growth in the use of machinery was
even more closely connected with the great development of recent years
than in that of textiles. It was quite natural that man should seek      197
the use of machinery in the iron and steel industry. The material to
be handled was of such great weight that it could not be handled in
quantities without the aid of extra-human power, and the fact that it
must be manipulated while at an intense heat necessitated the use of
devices of some sort for its handling. Yet a long time, a very long
time, elapsed after the beginning of the manufacture of iron and steel
before men developed the machinery which has resulted in such a
wonderful development in the manufacture. The slow rate of growth in
the earlier centuries, and the rapid rate in the past century may be
measured in some degree by the world’s production of pig iron, the
basis of all iron and steel manufactures. Mulhall estimates the
world’s production of pig iron in the year 1500 at 60,000 tons, in
1700 at 100,000 tons, and in 1800 at 460,000 tons. Then the increase
began to be more sharply defined, the production reaching 1 million
tons in 1820, 2½ million in 1840, 7 million in 1860, 18 million in
1880, 40 million in 1900 and nearly 60 million in 1907. The increase
in the eighteenth century was about one third of a million tons, and
that of the nineteenth century was 39½ million tons, or more than
100 times as much as that of the eighteenth century. The great
development in the transformation of iron into steel did not come
until the second half of the nineteenth century, the world’s
production of steel in 1850 being, according to Mulhall, 71,000 tons,
in 1870, 540,000 tons, in 1880, 4 million tons, in 1890,12 million, in
1900, approximately 20 million, and in 1907 about 40 million. The
growth in production of pig iron and steel was more rapid in Europe
than in the United States in the earlier part of the nineteenth
century, but in the latter part of that century the United States
outstripped all her rivals, and her production of iron and steel is
now more than that of any other two countries of the world.

These wonderful developments in the production of iron and steel were    198
even more dependent upon the development of machinery for transporting
the material and handling it in the factory than was the case with the
textiles. Pig iron cannot be made without having in immediate
conjunction three natural materials, iron ore, limestone and some
material to produce intense heat. The iron is only found in the form
of “ore,” being iron mixed with rocks, earth or other matter which
must be removed in order to use the iron. To do this the ore must be
heated. Formerly this was done by placing small quantities of charcoal
in a hole in the ground and placing the iron on top of it, and then
more charcoal on top of the ore. By fanning the burning charcoal or
blowing the fire from the lungs through a reed the heat was increased
and the ore was softened, and by hammering it while hot the useless
material was worked out. Then by further heatings it could be hammered
into such form as desired. After a while it occurred to men to build a
wall of stones and mud and place the ore and charcoal in this, and to
make a bellows of the skin of some animal (the prototype of those
which blacksmiths and other workers in metals now use), and so force
the air into the bottom of the mass of charcoal and iron. With this
the iron could be so heated that it actually melted and ran to the
bottom of the furnace, and when cooled was ready for the finer
processes by which it was made into the desired articles. After a time
the walls of the furnace were built higher and if it could be located
near to a waterfall the shaft of the water wheel was so adjusted as to
operate the bellows and keep the stream of air flowing into the fire,
for the heat of the burning charcoal was not sufficient to melt the
iron without this forced draft.

This was the process by which men made iron for many generations. But
it was a very expensive process, for the quantity of wood which must
be used to produce the charcoal was so great that the forests were       199
soon depleted, especially in England, where iron making became active.
Efforts were made to use coal instead of charcoal, but the weight of
the iron ore was so great that it crushed out the fire in the coal
which softened as it burned. Then after a time it occurred to somebody
to treat the coal in a manner somewhat similar to that by which the
wood had been transformed into charcoal, and coke was produced and
successfully substituted for charcoal in heating the iron ore and
making iron.

In the United States the charcoal process was used until a period much
later than that of its abandonment in England, for the supplies of
timber were very great and men who were clearing the land for use in
agriculture were glad to turn the wood into charcoal and find a market
for it. The simple charcoal furnace and forced draft by a simple
process furnished the iron-making systems of the world until the early
part of the nineteenth century. As a result there were hundreds of
small furnaces, simply operated, and turning out small quantities of
iron, in various sections of the United States. Meantime somebody
discovered that if the air which was forced into the furnace was
heated before being sent into the fire it would greatly increase the
heat-giving power of a given quantity of charcoal or coke, and the hot
blast became a part of the larger furnaces. Then it was found that the
anthracite coal of the United States was hard enough to bear the
weight of the ore and would produce a heat sufficiently intense to
melt it; and so a great iron industry developed in the anthracite
region of the United States. Then it was found that certain bituminous
coal in western Pennsylvania would make excellent coke for the
manufacture of iron, and the Connellsville coke became a successful
competitor of anthracite coal, and later other cokes were also used.
Later came the natural gas discoveries and they contributed to iron
making and working. Meantime railways were built to carry the ore to     200
the coal or the coal to the ore or both the ore and coal to some
convenient meeting point, and machinery began to be introduced for
handling the ore and the coal along the railway and at the furnace.
This led to the devising of other machinery for handling the iron
after it left the furnace and of rollers for rolling the iron into
bars and for giving it the sort of manipulation that the hammer of the
earlier iron maker had given it when produced in the primitive
furnaces. Then great deposits of iron ore, the richest known to the
world, were discovered in the Lake Superior regions; and steam-driven
machinery was devised to scoop it up from the beds in which it was
found, place it in cars, which in turn carried it to the water’s edge,
and dumped it into great receptacles from which it could run by the
force of gravity into the hold of the steamer. Then other machinery
operated by steam was devised to take it from the hold of the steamer
and load it again on the cars which transported it to the furnace
where it met the coal or the coke, produced, transported and handled
by similar machine processes, and was turned into iron to also be
handled by great machines.

While all this was happening--indeed long before the later happenings
above mentioned--workers in iron had found that the pig iron coming
from the furnaces contained so much carbon that it could not be
successfully worked. So they managed to get rid of the carbon, by
melting the iron in an open hearth and passing flames over it, and as
the carbon is combustible it was gradually burned out. This made soft
malleable iron, but not of the consistency to have the required
strength or serve the purposes that are now served by steel. To bring
it to the proper condition it was necessary to reintroduce a very
small quantity of carbon so evenly that both the quantity and the
distribution could be determined. This was done for many years by
placing the bars of iron in a crucible or other closed receptacle        201
surrounded by charcoal, and subjecting them to intense heat for
several hours or days. So the making of steel was a slow and expensive
process until about the middle of the nineteenth century. Then Sir
Henry Bessemer, an Englishman, discovered that by forcing air into the
bottom of a great retort containing molten iron the oxygen of the air
would combine with the carbon of the iron and in a few minutes the
objectionable carbon would be all burned out, and that by then
reintroducing in this molten mass of pure iron the required amount of
carbon in the form of spiegel iron or ferro manganese, steel could be
made much more cheaply and quickly than before. William Kelly, an
American, also devised a similar process about the same time. Thus
began the process of modern steel making, which has in a single half
century increased tenfold the world’s consumption of steel and thus of
iron, for a very large proportion of the iron now utilized in the
world is transformed into steel before being applied to the service
which it is to perform for men.

In all the processes by which iron and steel making have been
transformed from the simple methods of a century or two centuries ago
to the present system by which a single establishment may now make in
a week or month or year as much iron or steel as the whole world then
made in an equal length of time, machinery and capital have been the
great causes of the development--machinery for digging iron and coal,
for transporting them to the place of manufacture, for handling the
material in the natural state, for handling it in the furnace, for
handling it in the molten state, for rolling and shaping it after it
passes from the molten state to that in which it begins to take the
form of the finished product, and capital to purchase this machinery
and the great quantities of material required. “The very richness of
our resources,” says J. Russell Smith in The Story of Iron and Steel,
“has made such a wealth of opportunity for occupation in the United
States that labor is and has been scarce. As a consequence the           202
American iron industry has been driven over to a machine basis, and
its very success has arisen from the fact that a scarcity of labor has
compelled the introduction of machinery which has surpassed the dreams
of its inventors. In the iron and steel industry of America man does
little more than touch levers, while the balance is done by steam and
electricity. Four large Bessemer converters, holding 15 or 20 tons of
molten iron do their work by an air blast driven through the molten
material by the force of an engine. The electric cranes swing the
20-ton charges and the heavy converters as easily as a schoolboy
swings his dinner pail, and pours the new made steel into a metal mold
which stands on a tram ready to take it to the hydraulic machine which
draws the mold off the red-hot ingot. The manless way in which this
great steel ingot is turned into a useful piece of steel never ceases
to be a marvel. The great machines are seen but the plant seems to be
deserted. Then there arises a rumble and roaring noise and the great
piece of red-hot metal is seen to travel with all the independence of
a serpent across a lot of black rollers and dive into the jaws of the
rollers which squeeze it into flatter shape. Then it stops, turns over
and dives again through the same rollers, which flatten it still more.
After this has been repeated a few times you discover, standing on a
high platform, a man or two pulling the levers which start the
machinery of the six or seven thousand horsepower engines that drive
the knowing rollers which are crushing and rolling the ingot into the
shapes which man can use.”

“Perhaps the greatest difference between English and American steel
works,” said an English writer on this subject, “is the absence of
laborers in the American mills. The large and growing employment of
propelling and directing machinery is responsible for this. In a mill
rolling three thousand tons of rails in a day not a dozen men are to     203
be seen on the mill floor. To witness in such a mill the conversion in
a half hour of a red-hot steel ingot weighing several tons into
finished stamped steel rails ninety feet long, and all this perfectly,
by the agency of unseen hands, is to gain new ideas of the
possibilities of mechanism, of the subservience of matter to mind.”

These are some of the steps by which the systems of the manufacturing
world have been, in the past 150 years, transformed from household
work, or that of the small shop, into that of the factory--and the
factory developed into enormous establishments through the investment
of great sums of money in the purchase and installation of
ever-improving machinery, more ingenious, more productive, more
costly, but turning out more and better of the finished product with
each new device and new investment of capital.




III. DEVELOPMENT OF THE FACTORY SYSTEM.


The inventions by which the manufacturing of the world was transformed
from the household and the workshop to the great factory were the
result of years, generations indeed, of study of conditions one by one
as they arose. “No one of the inventions which were greatest in their
effect,” says Hobson, “was in the main attributable to the effort or
ability of a single man: each represented in its successful shape the
addition of many successive increments of discovery; in most cases the
successful invention was the slightly superior survivor of many
similar attempts. This is the history of most inventions. The pressure
of industrial circumstances directs the intelligence of many minds
toward the comprehension of some single point of difficulty, the
common knowledge of the age induces many to reach similar solutions,
that solution which is slightly better adapted to the facts comes out
victorious, and the inventor, purveyor or in some cases the robber is
crowned as a great inventive genius.”

England was the earliest scene of the development of the factory         204
system, the bringing together of great buildings and centers of great
masses of machinery operated by water or steam power and manned by
great numbers of people--for however ingenious the machine a certain
amount of human intelligence is necessary for its management and the
conduct of the work which it is to perform. The reasons for the
earlier development in England are not difficult to find. It had its
colonies in all parts of the world, from which to draw the raw
material and in which to market the manufactures, for it for many
years discouraged or prohibited manufacture in the colonies; it had
great shipping facilities for transporting its products to all parts
of the world, and to bring raw material and food supplies to its
workers at home; the ownership of its lands in great estates had a
tendency to send to the cities and manufacturing centers that part of
the population which under other circumstances would have employed
itself in agriculture; the laboring population yielded more readily to
the methods of the manufacturing interests than in other countries
where trade guilds determined more definitely the occupations and
methods of occupation of the working classes; and the comparative
freedom from wars permitted a more rapid growth than that of other
countries in which disturbances of this character were more frequent
and more liable to frequency than in an insular country, England.
“When Crompton’s mule, Cartwright’s power loom and Watt’s engines were
transforming the industry of England,” says Hobson, “her continental
rivals had all their energies absorbed in wars and political
revolutions.”

Much of the wool and flax required in the English industries was
produced at home. The colonies supplied the other fibers; the ships
returning from their voyages to the colonies brought the raw silk; the
absence of mountains to separate the country and the people into
districts and classes enabled the interchange of labor and materials;
the early development of rivers and canals gave cheap transportation;    205
the plentiful supply of coal encouraged the development of steam
power; and the proximity of iron ore and coal aided in developing that
other great manufacturing industry, iron and steel. Mr. Mulhall, the
celebrated statistician, estimates the value of the manufactures of
the United Kingdom in 1780 at 177 million pounds sterling, France 147
million, Germany 50 million, Austria 30 million, Russia, Italy and
Spain 10 million each, and the United States 15 million. In 1896 he
estimated the value of the manufactures of the same countries as
follows: United Kingdom, 876 million pounds sterling; France, 596
million; Germany, 690 million; Austria, 328 million; Russia, 380
million; Italy, 190 million; Spain, 121 million; and the United
States, 1,980 million. According to his estimate the gain in the 116
years, from 1780 to 1896, was: United Kingdom, from 191 to 876 million
pounds sterling; France, from 115 to 596 million; Germany, from 50 to
690 million; Austria, from 30 to 328 million; Russia, from 10 to 380
million; and the United States, from 15 to 1,980 million. Mr.
Mulhall’s estimates put the total value of the manufactures of
continental Europe in 1780 at about 1½ times those of the United
Kingdom; in 1896 at about 3 times those of the United Kingdom. His
estimates put the value of manufactures in the United States in 1870
at about 3⅓ per cent that of all Europe; in 1896 at about 55 per
cent that of all Europe.

It must not be supposed, however, that this transformation was, by any
means, instantaneous. It was, in fact, a matter of slow growth, even
in the older countries, and still more so in those countries which had
not yet developed their natural products or their agricultural
industries. In the case of the United States, for example, the
transformation from the hand to the machine methods did not come until
many years after that of the leading countries of Europe. The reason
for this slow movement on the part of the United States is not           206
difficult to understand. Her people were chiefly engaged in
agriculture, in felling the trees and clearing the lands in the
eastern part of the country, and in opening farms on the prairies of
the great West. Those who had capital to invest in enterprises other
than that of agriculture gave their attention to the construction of
methods of transportation, first, toll roads, stage coaches and pack
trains, then, canals, and finally railways. This occupied the
attention of the people of this new country for a generation after the
people of Europe and especially England were engaged in developing
their manufacturing industries.

So it is not surprising to see that Mr. Mulhall’s figures show that
English manufactures in 1820 were nearly 6 times as much as those of
the United States, and in 1840, 4 times as much as those of this
country; and even in 1860, considerably exceeded our own. But in the
next twenty-year period there came a great change. The Civil War in
the United States, with the home demands in the manufacturing section,
the North, rapidly developed the manufacturing industries, and the
development thus created continued after the close of that unhappy
period. So his figures indicate that in 1888, the next date which his
table touches, that our manufactures were 1¾ times as much as those
of the United Kingdom, and in 1896, 2¼ times as much in value as
those of the United Kingdom and half as great as those of all Europe.
Accepting the figures of Eugene Parsons, elsewhere referred to, for
the European countries in 1904, and accepting the official figures of
the United States for that same year, we find that the figures of the
value of manufactures in the United States are nearly 3 times those
accredited to the United Kingdom and but little less than those of all
Europe.

It is proper to say, however, that these statements, whether of
Mulhall, Parsons, or other authorities on this subject, are liable to
be extremely misleading unless carefully and intelligently               207
considered. The reason of this is found chiefly in the fact that the
official figures of the United States are made up on a materially
different basis from those of the other countries in question. To be
sure, the figures of the United States are official and therefore may
be considered reliable as to the facts which they purport to show, but
in fact some of the things which they purport to show are presumably
quite different from those quoted for the other countries included in
these estimates--for they can be only estimates for the other
countries, since no country other than the United States takes a
census of manufactures (England is taking one as this text is being
issued, but has not yet completed it), and the figures quoted
regarding their manufactures are necessarily estimates. Generally
speaking, it may be said that the census of the United States includes
certain articles which are not usually classified as manufactures in
other countries, such as products of slaughtering, canning, the
milling industry, etc. Aside from this it must also be remembered that
the usually quoted figures of the United States’ manufactures include
many duplications, due, as elsewhere explained, to the fact that the
total so quoted is merely an aggregation of the product of all
factories; and as the product of one factory often becomes the
manufacturing material of another, its value is again reported by the
manufacturer who reports merely the total value of his products. These
duplications are so numerous and prevail in such important and costly
articles that the census estimates the net or true value of our
manufactures at but about two-thirds as much as the usually quoted
figures of gross products. It would appear, therefore, that the
usually quoted figures of “manufactures in the United States,” when
compared with the estimate of manufacturing in other countries, should
be reduced about one-third to make them properly comparable with those
usually quoted for the other countries of the world. Even if this        208
were done, however, it would show the value of the United States’
manufactures probably about twice as great as those of the United
Kingdom and probably little less than those of continental Europe.

Taking Mulhall’s figures for the other countries which he includes, as
presented in a table on another page of this text, it will be seen
that the chief growth in manufacturing during the 116 years covered by
the table under consideration has occurred in the last third of the
period. English manufactures, he says, grew from 177 million pounds
sterling to 290 million in the 40-year period from 1780 to 1820; from
290 to 577 million in the next 40 years, from 1820 to 1860; and from
577 to 976 million in the 36 years from 1860 to 1896--a growth of 113
million pounds sterling in the first 40 years, of 287 million in the
second 40 years, and of 400 million in the third period of 36 years.
Germany showed a more rapid growth in the third period; the growth in
the first 40-year period being from 50 million pounds sterling to 85
million; in the second 40-year period, from 85 to 310 million; and in
the third period, of 36 years only, from 310 to 690 million. France
has not made as rapid a gain as Germany, the figures showing her
products in 1780, 147 million pounds sterling; in 1840, 220 million;
in 1860, 380 million; and in 1896, 596 million.

The total of Mulhall’s table, including the somewhat over-estimated
figures of the United States, and relating chiefly to the products of
Europe and the United States, show total manufactures of all the
countries named, in 1780, 480 million pounds sterling; in 1820, 865
million; in 1860, 2,404 million; and in 1896, 5,710 million, again
indicating that the chief growth has occurred in the last third of the
period under consideration, the period of transformation from the hand
industries to those of machine production in conjunction with vast
sums of capital and plentiful transportation facilities for collecting
the raw material and distributing the finished product.

When we consider nations or groups of people and their use of modern     209
methods of manufacturing, we may properly say that the principal
manufacturing sections of the world are western Europe and the United
States, and that, as above indicated, the bulk of the world’s
manufactures by the factory process are now produced in those two
sections of the world. Manufacturing by machinery may perhaps be said
to have originated in England, spreading thence to France, to Germany,
and westward to the United States. More recently it has extended in a
somewhat limited form into Canada in the west and India and Japan at
the extreme east. India has utilized modern methods of manufacture,
especially in cottons and certain other industries, for more than a
score of years, while the one other country of the Orient which has as
yet entered the field of machine manufacture, Japan, though somewhat
later in adopting machine methods, has been more active and extended
modern manufacturing to a much greater variety of industries than have
the people of India.

While certain of the European countries were earlier in the
manufacturing field than the United States, the larger population, the
greater supply of natural materials, the larger supplies of fuel for
cheap power, the ingenuity of the American workman, and the enormous
domestic demand of an active and prosperous people, have brought the
United States clearly to the head of the list of manufacturing
nations. It may safely be said that the value of manufactures produced
in the United States is approximately twice as great as that of any
other manufacturing nation, and that the stated value of our
manufactures is nearly as great as the estimated value of the
manufactures of all Europe. The latest official figures on the value
of the manufactures of the United States are those of the Census
Bureau, which put the value of manufactures produced in the calendar
year 1904, as recorded by the Census of 1905, at 16,867 million
dollars, including in this an estimate of a little more than 2           210
billion dollars’ worth of manufactures classed as “mechanical and
neighborhood industries,” which were included in all former census
reports, but not recorded by the Census of 1905, which was by law
merely a census of manufactures produced under “the factory system.”

No other country than the United States takes a periodic census of its
manufactures. The United Kingdom is at the present time about taking
for the first time a census of its manufactures, but no figures with
reference thereto are as yet available. As a consequence all
statements regarding the value of manufactures of European countries,
or indeed of any country other than the United States, are estimates
and estimates only. True, they are based upon certain known facts of
quantities of raw materials consumed in manufacturing, values of
manufactures exported, and the estimated proportion which these form
of the total manufactures; but in no other country than the United
States are there available official statements of the total value of
manufactures produced in the country in question. Therefore the
estimates of the value of the manufactures produced by European
countries which are quoted from time to time and which are presented
elsewhere in this text, must be accepted as merely estimates. A
comparatively recent estimate, and one which has been given wide
publicity, and appears to have been generally accepted, is that of
William J. Clark, published in The Engineering Magazine in 1904, which
put the value of the manufactures of the United Kingdom at 5 billion
dollars, Germany 4,600 million, France 3,450 million, Austria-Hungary
2 billion, Russia 1,980 million, Italy 1,700 million, Belgium 750
million. These estimates, if accepted, would bring the value of the
manufactures of the countries enumerated to a figure slightly in
excess of that officially reported by the Census Office as the value
of the product of all manufacturing establishments of the United
States in 1904. The figures above quoted for certain European countries  211
present however no estimate of the value of the product of
Switzerland, Spain, Holland and the Scandinavian countries, so that it
probably might be said with greater accuracy that the stated value of
the manufactures of the United States is about equal to the estimated
value of continental Europe, and about three times as great as the
estimated value of the manufactures of the United Kingdom.

It is proper, however, before leaving this question of the relative
value of the manufactures of the various countries, to again call
attention to the fact that the official figures of the value of
manufactures produced in the United States include certain articles
not classed in certain other countries as manufactures, and in
addition to this contain many duplications due to the fact that the
products of one manufacturer frequently become the raw material of
another, and thus the grand totals which merely combine the stated
value of the product of each manufacturer necessarily include a second
and in some cases a third valuation of the products thus utilized. The
manufacturer of yarn, for example, reports to the Census Office the
full value of the product of his factory. The manufacturer of cloth,
who utilized that yarn, also reports the full value of the product of
his factory, and thus includes in that valuation the value of the yarn
purchased by him but already reported by the manufacturer of yarn. The
manufacturer of clothing, in stating the value of the product of his
factory, includes the sums which he paid for the cloth already
reported by the manufacturer of clothing and included in his
statement. Thus many duplications occur in our census statement of the
gross value of the products of the manufacturing industries of the
United States. “This gross value,” says the Census Report of 1900,
page cxxxix, “does not represent the final value of the manufactured
products of the country. It does fairly represent the total value of     212
commercial transactions involved in manufacturing enterprises…. As
the finished products of one branch of manufacture are constantly used
as materials in other branches, in the ascending scale of modern
industry, it follows that they are counted over and over again,
swelling in this manner the gross total value of products. Thus in
cotton manufacture, the product of the yarn mill, manufacturing yarn
for sale as the material of the cloth mill, and the product of the
cloth mill as the material for the manufacturer, so that by the time
the aggregate is made the value of the yarn has been counted three
times and the value of the cloth twice…. Duplications and
re-duplications of this sort run all through the total value of
products as reported by this (the Census) office. * * * The net or
true value of the products is found by subtracting from the gross
value the cost of all materials purchased in a partially manufactured
form. In 1900 the cost of these manufactures was $4,633,804,967 and”
(subtracting this sum from the gross value, $13,004,400,143), “the net
value of products was therefore $8,370,595,176.”

When it is further considered that the Census of Manufactures in the
United States includes in its list of manufactures all products of
slaughtering and meat-packing establishments wholesale, valued in 1905
at 112 million dollars, the product of printing and publishing
newspapers and periodicals only, valued at 309 million, and the
product of canning and preserving fish, oysters and vegetables, valued
at over 100 million--it will be seen that an effort to determine even
approximately the share of the world’s manufactures produced by the
United States or by the various manufacturing nations of the world is
a difficult--an impossible--task.

It may safely be asserted, however, that the United States is the
world’s greatest manufacturing nation, and that the value of our
manufactures exceeds those of any other country. This is due, as
already indicated, to the fact that our supply of raw materials is       213
greater than that of any other country, our supply of materials for
producing power also greater than that of any other country, our use
of machinery for manufacturing far in advance of that of any other
nation, the activity of our inventors and the skill of our workmen
quite equal to those of any other part of the world, and the demands
of our home population upon our own manufacturers far in excess of
those of any other country, both by reason of the large population and
high purchasing power of a people prosperous and active in all lines
of industry--agriculture, transportation, manufacture. The country
which produces three-fourths of the world’s cotton, twice as much iron
and steel as any other single nation, as much copper as all of the
remainder of the world combined, more of wood suitable for use in
manufacturing than any other country, more wool than any other of the
manufacturing nations, and a population much larger than that of any
other country actively engaged in the manufacturing industries, has
quite naturally and almost necessarily become the leading manufacturer
of the world.

The growth of the manufacturing industry in the United States has been
phenomenal. Stated in the methods of valuation followed by the census
above referred to--the gross valuation--the value of manufactures
produced in the United States has been, speaking in round terms, in
1850, 1 billion dollars, in 1860, a little less than 2 billion, in
1870, 4¼ billion, in 1880, 5⅓ billion, in 1890, 9⅓ billion,
in 1900, 13 billion, and in 1905, a little less than 17 billion,
though the figures usually quoted for 1905 are 14.8 billion, owing to
the fact that the Census of 1905 only included factory products, and
added parenthetically an estimate of 2 billion as the probable value
of the “mechanical and neighborhood industries,” thus bringing up to
nearly 17 billion the total properly comparable with the totals of       214
earlier periods, which in all cases included the mechanical and
neighborhood industries.

That this rapid growth in the value of manufactures has been far in
excess of the consuming capacity of the home population is evidenced
by the growth in exportation of manufactures, which aggregated in
1880, 122 million dollars, in 1890, 179 million, in 1900, 484 million,
and in 1908, 750 million. Manufactures formed in 1880 but 15 per cent
of the total exports, in 1890, 23 per cent, in 1900, 35 per cent, and
in 1908, 41 per cent of the total merchandise exported from the United
States.




IV. CAPITAL IN MANUFACTURING.


Another factor which entered into the modern system of production, and
a very important one, was that of capital. The factory could not be
established or operated without considerable amounts of money or its
equivalent, credit. The machinery which transformed the raw material
into the finished product, the material itself, the very buildings in
which the work was performed, the payment for the transportation which
brought it together, the wages of the men and women engaged in the
work, all required capital, and in large sums. The accumulation of
this capital, its management, the keeping of accounts of cost of
material and labor and of the finished product, required financial
skill and acquaintance in the markets in which this capital could be
obtained; for often the sums required were in excess of the quantity
possessed by the individual who had invested his all in the buildings
and machinery, and must needs borrow of some other capitalist the
additional sums required for purchasing material and paying the wages
of his workmen. Sometimes the owner of the capital preferred to supply
it and take a proportionate share in the earnings of the factory, and
thus developed the company. Then, as the business grew and the
investments of various men in a single establishment increased, it
became necessary for them to take an active share in the management      215
either in person or by representatives who became known as the
“directors” of the work.

Thus arose the successors of the individual manufacturer, the company,
and the corporation. Man must die and the death of an individual
manufacturer, or the manager of a manufacturing firm or partnership,
must affect disadvantageously the interests of the factory and its
employes. Thus the importance of organizations which would continue
unchanged in form and general management in case of the absence or
death of any individual. This was one of the reasons for the
establishment of the corporation. More important than this was the
facility which it offered to holders of capital in sums large or small
to invest their money in manufacturing without being compelled to give
their individual attention to the industry in which the money was
invested. The board of directors, which the investors might choose,
managed the business either by personal attention or by the selection
of competent and experienced persons for that service, and the
investor felt assured that his money would be properly managed by the
competent business men forming the board of directors and the experts
whom these directors might employ to manage the details. Hence the
corporation, under which the manufacturing establishments grew to
enormous proportions, employing thousands and tens of thousands of
people, and bringing material from the places in which it could be
most cheaply obtained, investing money if need be in facilities for
transporting and even producing the raw material, and cheapening the
cost of production.

Another step which increased the importance of capital as a factor in
the great manufacturing industries of the world came in more recent
combinations of great corporations, in which a number of great
manufacturing establishments agree to operate under one general
management, thus adjusting production in the various lines of            216
manufacture to the general demand, existing supply and prospective
consuming power of the markets, establishing systematic methods for
exploiting and selling the finished product, and so further minimizing
cost of production and distribution. This last combination, the
corporation of corporations, is generally known as the “trust” or
“combine,” and under it the great manufacturing industries of the
world have reached their greatest development, the cost of production
has been minimized, the field for the selection of the materials has
been enlarged, and the area in which the products are offered for sale
also greatly extended.

While these great organizations, made up by placing under one general
management a number of great establishments manufacturing articles of
like character, are doubtless able to reduce the cost of production
and distribution and prevent production in excess of probable demand,
it is also true that they are in many cases able to exercise a greater
control over prices of labor, of material and of finished product than
when operating singly.

Meantime the world’s supply of money for investing in manufacturing,
and the industries which contribute thereto, grea